<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter I</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="index.xhtml" title="The Silver Chair"/><link rel="next" href="ch02.xhtml" title="Chapter II"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter I" epub:type="chapter" id="id70364673704880"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter I</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Behind the Gym</em></h3></div></div></div><p>It was a dull autumn day and Jill Pole was crying behind the gym.</p><p>She was crying because they had been bullying her.  This is not going
to be a school story, so I shall say as little as possible about Jill's
school, which is not a pleasant subject.  It was "Co–educational", a
school for both boys and girls, what used to be called a "mixed"
school; some said it was not nearly so mixed as the minds of the people
who ran it.  These people had the idea that boys and girls should be
allowed to do what they liked.  And unfortunately what ten or fifteen
of the biggest boys and girls liked best was bullying the others.  All
sorts of things, horrid things, went on which at an ordinary school
would have been found out and stopped in half a term; but at this
school they weren't.  Or even if they were, the people who did them
were not expelled or punished.  The Head said they were interesting
psychological cases and sent for them and talked to them for hours.
And if you knew the right sort of things to say to the Head, the main
result was that you became rather a favourite than otherwise.</p><p>That was why Jill Pole was crying on that dull autumn day on the damp
little path which runs between the back of the gym and the shrubbery.
And she hadn't nearly finished her cry when a boy came round the corner
to the gym whistling, with his hands in his pockets.  He nearly ran
into her.</p><p>"Can't you look where you're going?" said Jill Pole.</p><p>"All <span class="emphasis"><em>right</em></span>," said the boy, "you needn't start―" and then he
noticed her face.  "I say, Pole," he said, "what's up?"</p><p>Jill only made faces; the sort you make when you're trying to say
something but find that if you speak you'll start crying again.</p><p>"It's <span class="emphasis"><em>Them</em></span>, I suppose—as usual," said the boy grimly, digging his
hands further into his pockets.</p><p>Jill nodded.  There was no need for her to say anything, even if she
could have said it.  They both knew.</p><p>"Now, look here," said the boy, "there's no good us all―"</p><p>He meant well, but he <span class="emphasis"><em>did</em></span> talk rather like someone beginning a
lecture.  Jill suddenly flew into a temper (which is quite a likely
thing to happen if you have been interrupted in a cry).</p><p>"Oh, go away and mind your own business," she said.  "Nobody asked you
to come barging in, did they?  And you're a nice person to start
telling us what we all ought to do, aren't you?  I suppose you mean we
ought to spend all our time sucking up to Them, and currying favour,
and dancing attendance on Them like you do."</p><p>"Oh, Lor!" said the boy, sitting down on the grassy bank at the edge of
the shrubbery and very quickly getting up again because the grass was
soaking wet.  His name unfortunately was Eustace Scrubb, but he wasn't
a bad sort.</p><p>"Pole!" he said, "Is that fair?  Have I been doing anything of the sort
this term?  Didn't I stand up to Carter about the rabbit?  And didn't I
keep the secret about Spivvins—under torture too?  And didn't I―"</p><p>"I d–don't know and I don't care," sobbed Jill.</p><p>Scrubb saw that she wasn't quite herself yet and very sensibly offered
her a peppermint.  He had one too.  Presently Jill began to see things
in a clearer light.</p><p>"I'm sorry, Scrubb," she said presently.  "I wasn't fair.  You have
done all that—this term."</p><p>"Then wash out last term if you can," said Eustace.  "I was a different
chap then.  I was—gosh! what a little tick I was."</p><p>"Well, honestly, you were," said Jill.</p><p>"You think there has been a change, then?" said Eustace.</p><p>"It's not only me," said Jill.  "Everyone's been saying so.  <span class="emphasis"><em>They</em></span>'ve
noticed it.  Eleanor Blakiston heard Adela Pennyfather talking about it
in our changing room yesterday.  She said, 'Someone's got hold of that
Scrubb kid.  He's quite unmanageable this term.  We shall have to
attend to <span class="emphasis"><em>him</em></span> next.'"</p><p>Eustace gave a shudder.  Everyone at Experiment House knew what it was
like being "attended to" by <span class="emphasis"><em>Them</em></span>.</p><p>Both children were quiet for a moment.  The drops dripped off the
laurel leaves.</p><p>"Why were you so different last term?" said Jill Presently.</p><p>"A lot of queer things happened to me in the hols," said Eustace
mysteriously.</p><p>"What sort of things?" asked Jill.</p><p>Eustace didn't say anything for quite a long time.  Then he said:</p><p>"Look here, Pole, you and I hate this place about as much as anybody
can hate anything, don't we?"</p><p>"I know I do," said Jill.</p><p>"Then I really think I can trust you."</p><p>"Dam' good of you," said Jill.</p><p>"Yes, but this is a really terrific secret.  Pole, I say, are you good
at believing things?  I mean things that everyone here would laugh at?"</p><p>"I've never had the chance," said Jill, "but I think I would be."</p><p>"Could you believe me if I said I'd been right out of the
world—outside this world—last hols?"</p><p>"I wouldn't know what you meant."</p><p>"Well, don't let's bother about worlds then.  Supposing I told you I'd
been in a place where animals can talk and where there
are—er—enchantments and dragons—and—well, all the sorts of things
you have in fairy tales."  Scrubb felt terribly awkward as he said this
and got red in the face.</p><p>"How did you get there?" said Jill.  She also felt curiously shy.</p><p>"The only way you can—by Magic," said Eustace almost in a whisper.  "I
was with two cousins of mine.  We were just—whisked away.  They'd been
there before."</p><p>Now that they were talking in whispers Jill somehow felt it easier to
believe.  Then suddenly a horrible suspicion came over her and she said
(so fiercely that for the moment she looked like a tigress):</p><p>"If I find you've been pulling my leg I'll never speak to you again;
never, never, never."</p><p>"I'm not," said Eustace.  "I swear I'm not.  I swear by—by everything."</p><p>(When I was at school one would have said, "I swear by the Bible."  But
Bibles were not encouraged at Experiment House.)</p><p>"All right," said Jill, "I'll believe you."</p><p>"And tell nobody?"</p><p>"What do you take me for?"</p><p>They were very excited as they said this.  But when they had said it
and Jill looked round and saw the dull autumn sky and heard the drip
off the leaves and thought of all the hopelessness of Experiment House
(it was a thirteen–week term and there were still eleven weeks to come)
she said:</p><p>"But after all, what's the good?  We're not there: we're here.  And we
jolly well can't get <span class="emphasis"><em>there</em></span>.  Or can we?"</p><p>"That's what I've been wondering," said Eustace.  "When we came back
from That Place, Someone said that the two Pevensie kids (that's my two
cousins) could never go there again.  It was their third time, you see.
I suppose they've had their share.  But he never said I couldn't.
Surely he would have said so, unless he meant that I was to get back?
And I can't help wondering, can we—could we?―"</p><p>"Do you mean, do something to make it happen?"</p><p>Eustace nodded.</p><p>"You mean we might draw a circle on the ground—and write things in
queer letters in it—and stand inside—and recite charms and spells?"</p><p>"Well," said Eustace after he had thought hard for a bit.  "I believe
that was the sort of thing I was thinking of, though I never did it.
But now that it comes to the point, I've an idea that all those circles
and things are rather rot.  I don't think he'd like them.  It would
look as if we thought we could make him do things.  But really, we can
only ask him."</p><p>"Who is this person you keep on talking about?"</p><p>"They call him Aslan in that place," said Eustace.</p><p>"What a curious name!"</p><p>"Not half so curious as himself," said Eustace solemnly.  "But let's
get on.  It can't do any harm, just asking.  Let's stand side by side,
like this.  And we'll hold out our a arms in front of us with the palms
down: like they did in Ramandu's island―"</p><p>"Whose island?"</p><p>"I'll tell you about that another time.  And he might like us to face
the east.  Let's see, where is the east?"</p><p>"I don't know," said Jill.</p><p>"It's an extraordinary thing about girls that they never know the
points of the compass," said Eustace.</p><p>"You don't know either," said Jill indignantly.</p><p>"Yes I do, if only you didn't keep on interrupting.  I've got it now.
That's the east, facing up into the laurels.  Now, will you say the
words after me?"</p><p>"What words?" asked Jill.</p><p>"The words I'm going to say, of course," answered Eustace.  "Now―"</p><p>And he began, "Aslan, Aslan, Aslan!"</p><p>"Aslan, Aslan, Aslan," repeated Jill.</p><p>"Please let us two go into―"</p><p>At that moment a voice from the other side of the gym was heard
shouting out, "Pole?  Yes.  I know where she is.  She's blubbing behind
the gym.  Shall I fetch her out?"</p><p>Jill and Eustace gave one glance at each other, dived under the
laurels, and began scrambling up the steep, earthy slope of the
shrubbery at a speed which did them great credit.  (Owing to the
curious methods of teaching at Experiment House, one did not learn much
French or Maths or Latin or things of that sort; but one did learn a
lot about getting away quickly and quietly when They were looking for
one.)</p><p>After about a minute's scramble they stopped to listen, and knew by the
noises they heard that they were being followed.</p><p>"If only the door was open again!" said Scrubb as they went on, and
Jill nodded.  For at the top of the shrubbery was a high stone wall and
in that wall a door by which you could get out onto open moor.  This
door was nearly always locked.  But there had been times when people
had found it open; or perhaps there had been only one time.  But you
may imagine how the memory of even one time kept people hoping, and
trying the door; for if it should happen to be unlocked it would be a
splendid way of getting outside the school grounds without being seen.</p><p>Jill and Eustace, now both very hot and very grubby from going along
bent almost double under the laurels, panted up to the wall.  And there
was the door, shut as usual.</p><p>"It's sure to be no good," said Eustace with his hand on the handle;
and then, "O–o–oh.  By Gum!!"  For the handle turned and the door
opened.</p><p>A moment before, both of them had meant to get through that doorway in
double quick time, if by any chance the door was not locked.  But when
the door actually opened, they both stood stock still.  For what they
saw was quite different from what they had expected.</p><p>They had expected to see the grey, heathery slope of the moor going up
and up to join the dull autumn sky.  Instead, a blaze of sunshine met
them.  It poured through the doorway as the light of a June day pours
into a garage when you open the door.  It made the drops of water on
the grass glitter like beads and showed up the dirtiness of Jill's
tear–stained face.  And the sunlight was coming from what certainly did
look like a different world—what they could see of it.  They saw
smooth turf, smoother and brighter than Jill had ever seen before, and
blue sky, and, darting to and fro, things so bright that they might
have been jewels or huge butterflies.</p><p>Although she had been longing for something like this, Jill felt
frightened.  She looked at Scrubb's face and saw that he was frightened
too.</p><p>"Come on, Pole," he said in a breathless voice.</p><p>"Can we get back?  Is it safe?" asked Jill.</p><p>At that moment a voice shouted from behind, a mean, spiteful little
voice.  "Now then, Pole," it squeaked.  "Everyone knows you're there.
Down you come."  It was the voice of Edith Jackie, not one of Them
herself but one of their hangers–on and tale–bearers.</p><p>"Quick!" said Scrubb.  "Here.  Hold hands.  We mustn't get separated."
And before she quite knew what was happening, he had grabbed her hand
and pulled her through the door, out of the school grounds, out of
England, out of our whole world into That Place.</p><p>The sound of Edith Jackie's voice stopped as suddenly as the voice on
the radio when it is switched off.  Instantly there was a quite
different sound all about them.  It came from those bright things
overhead, which now turned out to be birds.  They were making a riotous
noise, but it was much more like music—rather advanced music which you
don't quite take in at the first hearing—than birds' songs ever are in
our world.  Yet, in spite of the singing, there was a sort of
background of immense silence.  That silence, combined with the
freshness of the air, made Jill think they must be on the top of a very
high mountain.</p><p>Scrubb still had her by the hand and they were walking forward, staring
about them on every side.  Jill saw that huge trees, rather like cedars
but bigger, grew in every direction.  But as they did not grow close
together, and as there was no undergrowth, this did not prevent one
from seeing a long way into the forest to left and right.  And as far
as Jill's eye could reach, it was all the same—level turf, darting
birds with yellow, or dragonfly blue, or rainbow plumage, blue shadows,
and emptiness.  There was not a breath of wind in that cool, bright
air.  It was a very lonely forest.</p><p>Right ahead there were no trees: only blue sky.  They went straight on
without speaking till suddenly Jill heard Scrubb say, "Look out!" and
felt herself jerked back.  They were at the very edge of a cliff.</p><p>Jill was one of those lucky people who have a good head for heights.
She didn't mind in the least standing on the edge of a precipice.  She
was rather annoyed with Scrubb for pulling her back—"just as if I was
a kid," she said—and she wrenched her hand out of his.  When she saw
how very white he had turned, she despised him.</p><p>"What's the matter?" she said.  And to show that she was not afraid,
she stood very near the edge indeed; in fact, a good deal nearer than
even she liked.  Then she looked down.</p><p>She now realised that Scrubb had some excuse for looking white, for no
cliff in our world is to be compared with this.  Imagine yourself at
the top of the very highest cliff you know.  And imagine yourself
looking down to the very bottom.  And then imagine that the precipice
goes on below that, as far again, ten times as far, twenty times as
far.  And when you've looked down all that distance imagine little
white things that might, at first glance, be mistaken for sheep, but
presently you realise that they are clouds—not little wreaths of mist
but the enormous white, puffy clouds which are themselves as big as
most mountains.  And at last, in between those clouds, you get your
first glimpse of the real bottom, so far away that you can't make out
whether it's field or wood, or land or water: further below those
clouds than you are above them.</p><p>Jill stared at it.  Then she thought that perhaps, after all, she would
step back a foot or so from the edge; but she didn't like to for fear
of what Scrubb would think.  Then she suddenly decided that she didn't
care what he thought, and that she would jolly well get away from that
horrible edge and never laugh at anyone for not liking heights again.
But when she tried to move, she found she couldn't.  Her legs seemed to
have turned into putty.  Everything was swimming before her eyes.</p><p>"What are you doing, Pole?  Come back—blithering little idiot!"
shouted Scrubb.  But his voice seemed to be coming from a long way off.
She felt him grabbing at her.  But by now she had no control over her
own arms and legs.  There was a moment's struggling on the cliff edge.
Jill was too frightened and dizzy to know quite what she was doing, but
two things she remembered as long as she lived (they often came back to
her in dreams).  One was that she had wrenched herself free of Scrubb's
clutches; the other was that, at the same moment, Scrubb himself, with
a terrified scream, had lost his balance and gone hurtling to the
depths.</p><p>Fortunately she was given no time to think over what she had done.
Some huge, brightly coloured animal had rushed to the edge of the
cliff.  It was lying down, leaning over, and (this was the odd thing)
blowing.  Not roaring or snorting but just blowing from its wide–opened
mouth; blowing out as steadily as a vacuum cleaner sucks in.  Jill was
lying so close to the creature that she could feel the breath vibrating
steadily through its body.  She was lying still because she couldn't
get up.  She was nearly fainting: indeed, she wished she could really
faint, but faints don't come for the asking.  At last she saw, far away
below her, a tiny black speck floating away from the cliff and slightly
upwards.  As it rose, it also got further away.  By the time it was
nearly on a level with the cliff top it was so far off that she lost
sight of it.  It was obviously moving away from them at a great speed.
Jill couldn't help thinking that the creature at her side was blowing
it away.</p><p>So she turned and looked at the creature.  It was a lion.</p></section><footer/></body></html>