<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter II</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01.xhtml" title="Chapter I"/><link rel="next" href="ch03.xhtml" title="Chapter III"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter II" epub:type="chapter" id="id70364673722980"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter II</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Jill is Given a Task</em></h3></div></div></div><p>Without a glance at Jill the lion rose to its feet and gave one last
blow.  Then, as if satisfied with its work, it turned and stalked
slowly away, back into the forest.</p><p>"It must be a dream, it must, it must," said Jill to herself.  "I'll
wake up in a moment."  But it wasn't, and she didn't.</p><p>"I do wish we'd never come to this dreadful place," said Jill.  "I
don't believe Scrubb knew any more about it than I do.  Or if he did,
he had no business to bring me here without warning me what it was
like.  It's not my fault he fell over that cliff.  If he'd left me
alone we should both be all right."  Then she remembered again the
scream that Scrubb had given when he fell, and burst into tears.</p><p>Crying is all right in its way while it lasts.  But you have to stop
sooner or later and then you still have to decide what to do.  When
Jill stopped, she found she was dreadfully thirsty.  She had been lying
face downward, and now she sat up.  The birds had ceased singing and
there was perfect silence except for one small persistent sound which
seemed to come a good distance away.  She listened carefully and felt
almost sure it was the sound of running water.</p><p>Jill got up and looked round her very carefully.  There was no sign of
the lion; but there were so many trees about that it might easily be
quite close without her seeing it.  For all she knew, there might be
several lions.  But her thirst was very bad now, and she plucked up her
courage to go and look for that running water.  She went on tip–toes,
stealing cautiously from tree to tree, and stopping to peer round her
at every step.</p><p>The wood was so still that it was not difficult to decide where the
sound was coming from.  It grew clearer every moment and, sooner than
she expected, she came to an open glade and saw the stream, bright as
glass, running across the turf a stone's throw away from her.  But
although the sight of the water made her feel ten times thirstier than
before, she didn't rush forward and drink.  She stood as still as if
she had been turned into stone, with her mouth wide open.  And she had
a very good reason; just on this side of the stream lay the lion.</p><p>It lay with its head raised and its two fore–paws out in front of it,
like the lions in Trafalgar Square.  She knew at once that it had seen
her, for its eyes looked straight into hers for a moment and then
turned away—as if it knew her quite well and didn't think much of her.</p><p>"If I run away, it'll be after me in a moment," thought Jill.  "And if
I go on, I shall run straight into its mouth."  Anyway, she couldn't
have moved if she had tried, and she couldn't take her eyes off it.
How long this lasted, she could not be sure; it seemed like hours.  And
the thirst became so bad that she almost felt she would not mind being
eaten by the lion if only she could be sure of getting a mouthful of
water first.</p><p>"If you're thirsty, you may drink."</p><p>They were the first words she had heard since Scrubb had spoken to her
on the edge of the cliff.  For a second she stared here and there,
wondering who had spoken.  Then the voice said again, "If you are
thirsty, come and drink," and of course she remembered what Scrubb had
said about animals talking in that other world, and realised that it
was the lion speaking.  Anyway, she had seen its lips move this time,
and the voice was not like a man's.  It was deeper, wilder, and
stronger; a sort of heavy, golden voice.  It did not make her any less
frightened than she had been before, but it made her frightened in
rather a different way.</p><p>"Are you not thirsty?" said the Lion.</p><p>"I'm <span class="emphasis"><em>dying</em></span> of thirst," said Jill.</p><p>"Then drink," said the Lion.</p><p>"May I—could I—would you mind going away while I do?" said Jill.</p><p>The Lion answered this only by a look and a very low growl.  And as
Jill gazed at its motionless bulk, she realised that she might as well
have asked the whole mountain to move aside for her convenience.</p><p>The delicious rippling noise of the stream was driving her nearly
frantic.</p><p>"Will you promise not to—do anything to me, if I do come?" said Jill.</p><p>"I make no promise," said the Lion.</p><p>Jill was so thirsty now that, without noticing it, she had come a step
nearer.</p><p>"<span class="emphasis"><em>Do</em></span> you eat girls?" she said.</p><p>"I have swallowed up girls and boys, women and men, kings and emperors,
cities and realms," said the Lion.  It didn't say this as if it were
boasting, nor as if it were sorry, nor as if it were angry.  It just
said it.</p><p>"I daren't come and drink," said Jill.</p><p>"Then you will die of thirst," said the Lion.</p><p>"Oh dear!" said Jill, coming another step nearer.  "I suppose I must go
and look for another stream then."</p><p>"There is no other stream," said the Lion.</p><p>It never occurred to Jill to disbelieve the Lion—no one who had seen
his stern face could do that—and her mind suddenly made itself up.  It
was the worst thing she had ever had to do, but she went forward to the
stream, knelt down, and began scooping up water in her hand.  It was
the coldest, most refreshing water she had ever tasted.  You didn't
need to drink much of it, for it quenched your thirst at once.  Before
she tasted it she had been intending to make a dash away from the Lion
the moment she had finished.  Now, she realised that this would be on
the whole the most dangerous thing of all.  She got up and stood there
with her lips still wet from drinking.</p><p>"Come here," said the Lion.  And she had to.  She was almost between
its front paws now, looking straight into its face.  But she couldn't
stand that for long; she dropped her eyes.</p><p>"Human Child," said the Lion, "Where is the Boy?"</p><p>"He fell over the cliff," said Jill, and added, "Sir."  She didn't know
what else to call him, and it sounded cheek to call him nothing.</p><p>"How did he come to do that, Human Child?"</p><p>"He was trying to stop me from falling, Sir."</p><p>"Why were you so near the edge, Human Child?"</p><p>"I was showing off, Sir."</p><p>"That is a very good answer, Human Child.  Do so no more.  And now"
(here for the first time the Lion's face became a little less stern)
"the Boy is safe.  I have blown him to Narnia.  But your task will be
the harder because of what you have done."</p><p>"Please, what task, Sir?" said Jill.</p><p>"The task for which I called you and him here out of your own world."</p><p>This puzzled Jill very much.  "It's mistaking me for someone else," she
thought.  She didn't dare to tell the Lion this, though she felt things
would get into a dreadful muddle unless she did.</p><p>"Speak your thought, Human Child," said the Lion.</p><p>"I was wondering—I mean—could there be some mistake?  Because nobody
called me and Scrubb, you know.  It was we who asked to come here.
Scrubb said we were to call to—to Somebody—it was a name I wouldn't
know—and perhaps the Somebody would let us in.  And we did, and then
we found the door open."</p><p>"You would not have called to me unless I had been calling to you,"
said the Lion.</p><p>"Then you are Somebody, Sir?" said Jill.</p><p>"I am.  And now hear your task.  Far from here in the land of Narnia
there lives an aged king who is sad because he has no prince of his
blood to be king after him.  He has no heir because his only son was
stolen from him many years ago and no one in Narnia knows where that
prince went or whether he is still alive.  But he is.  I lay on you
this command, that you seek this lost prince until either you have
found him and brought him to his father's house, or else died in the
attempt, or else gone back into your own world."</p><p>"How, please?" said Jill.</p><p>"I will tell you, Child," said the Lion.  "These are the signs by which
I will guide you in your quest.  First; as soon as the Boy Eustace sets
foot in Narnia, he will meet an old and dear friend.  He must greet
that friend at once; if he does, you will both have good help.  Second;
you must journey out of Narnia to the north till you come to the ruined
city of the ancient giants.  Third; you shall find a writing on a stone
in that ruined city, and you must do what the writing tells you.
Fourth; you will know the lost prince (if you find him) by this, that
he will be the first person you have met in your travels who will ask
you to do something in my name, in the name of Aslan."</p><p>As the Lion seemed to have finished, Jill thought she should say
something.  So she said "Thank you very much.  I see."</p><p>"Child," said Aslan, in a gentler voice than he had yet used, "perhaps
you do not see quite as well as you think.  But the first step is to
remember.  Repeat to me, in order, the four signs."</p><p>Jill tried, and didn't get them quite right.  So the Lion corrected her
and made her repeat them again and again till she could say them
perfectly.  He was very patient over this, so that, when it was done,
Jill plucked up courage to ask:</p><p>"Please, how am I to get to Narnia?"</p><p>"On my breath," said the Lion.  "I will blow you into the west of the
world as I blew Eustace."</p><p>"Shall I catch him in time to tell him the first sign?  But I suppose
it won't matter.  If he sees an old friend, he's sure to go and speak
to him, isn't he?"</p><p>"You will have no time to spare," said the Lion.  "That is why I must
send you at once.  Come.  Walk before me to the edge of the cliff."</p><p>Jill remembered very well that if there was no time to spare, that was
her own fault.  "If I hadn't made such a fool of myself, Scrubb and I
would have been going together.  And he'd have heard all the
instructions as well as me," she thought.  So she did as she was told.
It was very alarming walking back to the edge of the cliff, especially
as the Lion did not walk with her but behind her—making no noise on
his soft paws.</p><p>But long before she had got anywhere near the edge, the voice behind
her said, "Stand still.  In a moment I will blow.  But, first,
remember, remember, remember the signs.  Say them to yourself when you
wake in the morning and when you lie down at night, and when you wake
in the middle of the night.  And whatever strange things may happen to
you, let nothing turn your mind from following the signs.  And
secondly, I give you a warning.  Here on the mountain I have spoken to
you clearly: I will not often do so down in Narnia.  Here on the
mountain, the air is clear and your mind is clear; as you drop down
into Narnia, the air will thicken.  Take great care that it does not
confuse your mind.  And the signs which you have learned here will not
look at all as you expect them to look, when you meet them there.  That
is why it is so important to know them by heart and pay no attention to
appearances.  Remember the signs and believe the signs.  Nothing else
matters.  And now, daughter of Eve, farewell―"</p><p>The voice had been growing softer towards the end of this speech and
now it faded away altogether.  Jill looked behind her.  To her
astonishment she saw the cliff already more than a hundred yards behind
her, and the Lion himself a speck of bright gold on the edge of it.
She had been setting her teeth and clenching her fists for a terrible
blast of lion's breath; but the breath had really been so gentle that
she had not even noticed the moment at which she left the earth.  And
now, there was nothing but air for thousands upon thousands of feet
below her.</p><p>She felt frightened only for a second.  For one thing, the world
beneath her was so very far away that it seemed to have nothing to do
with her.  For another, floating on the breath of the Lion was so
extremely comfortable.  She found she could lie on her back or on her
face and twist any way she pleased, just as you can in water (if you've
learned to float really well).  And because she was moving at the same
pace as the breath, there was no wind, and the air seemed beautifully
warm.  It was not in the least like being in an aeroplane, because
there was no noise and no vibration.  If Jill had ever been in a
balloon she might have thought it more like that; only better.</p><p>When she looked back now she could take in for the first time the real
size of the mountain she was leaving.  She wondered why a mountain so
huge as that was not covered with snow and ice—"but I suppose all that
sort of thing is different in this world," thought Jill.  Then she
looked below her; but she was so high that she couldn't make out
whether she was floating over land or sea, nor what speed she was going
at.</p><p>"By Jove!  The signs!" said Jill suddenly.  "I'd better repeat them."
She was in a panic for a second or two, but she found she could still
say them all correctly.  "So that's all right," she said, and lay back
on the air as if it was a sofa, with a sigh of contentment.</p><p>"Well, I do declare," said Jill to herself some hours later, "I've been
asleep.  Fancy sleeping on air.  I wonder if anyone's done it before.
I don't suppose they have.  Oh bother—Scrubb probably has!  On this
same journey, a little bit before me.  Let's see what it looks like
down below."</p><p>What it looked like was an enormous, very dark blue plain.  There were
no hills to be seen, but there were biggish white things moving slowly
across it.  "Those must be clouds," she thought.  "But far bigger than
the ones we saw from the cliff.  I suppose they're bigger because
they're nearer.  I must be getting lower.  Bother this sun."</p><p>The sun which had been high overhead when she began her journey was now
getting in her eyes.  This meant that it was getting lower, ahead of
her.  Scrubb was quite right in saying that Jill (I don't know about
girls in general) didn't think much about points of the compass.
Otherwise she would have known, when the sun began getting in her eyes,
that she was travelling pretty nearly due west.</p><p>Staring at the blue plain below her, she presently noticed that there
were little dots of brighter, paler colour in it here and there.  "It's
the sea!" thought Jill.  "I do believe those are islands."  And so they
were.  She might have felt rather jealous if she had known that some of
them were islands which Scrubb had seen from a ship's deck and even
landed on; but she didn't know this.  Then, later on, she began to see
that there were little wrinkles on the blue flatness: little wrinkles
which must be quite big ocean waves if you were down among them.  And
now, all along the horizon there was a thick dark line which grew
thicker and darker so quickly that you could see it growing.  That was
the first sign she had had of the great speed at which she was
travelling.  And she knew that the thickening line must be land.</p><p>Suddenly from her left (for the wind was in the south) a great white
cloud came rushing towards her, this time on the same level as herself.
And before she knew where she was, she had shot right into the middle
of its cold, wet fogginess.  That took her breath away, but she was in
it only for a moment.  She came out blinking in the sunlight and found
her clothes wet.  (She had on a blazer and sweater and shorts and
stockings and pretty thick shoes; it had been a muddy sort of day in
England.)  She came out lower than she had gone in; and as soon as she
did so she noticed something which, I suppose, she ought to have been
expecting, but which came as a surprise and a shock.  It was Noises.
Up till then she had travelled in total silence.  Now, for the first
time, she heard the noise of waves and the crying of seagulls.  And now
too she smelled the smell of the sea.  There was no mistake about her
speed now.  She saw two waves meet with a smack and a spout of foam go
up between them; but she had hardly seen it before it was a hundred
yards behind her.  The land was getting nearer at a great pace.  She
could see mountains far inland, and other nearer mountains on her left.
She could see bays and headlands, woods and fields, stretches of sandy
beach.  The sound of waves breaking on the shore was growing louder
every second and drowning the other sea noises.</p><p>Suddenly the land opened right ahead of her.  She was coming to the
mouth of a river.  She was very low now, only a few feet above the
water.  A wave–top came against her toe and a great splash of foam
spurted up, drenching her nearly to the waist.  Now she was losing
speed.  Instead of being carried up the river she was gliding in to the
river bank on her left.  There were so many things to notice that she
could hardly take them all in; a smooth, green lawn, a ship so brightly
coloured that it looked like an enormous piece of jewellery, towers and
battlements, banners fluttering in the air, a crowd, gay clothes,
armour, gold, swords, a sound of music.  But this was all jumbled.  The
first thing that she knew clearly was that she had alighted and was
standing under a thicket of trees close by the river side, and there,
only a few feet away from her, was Scrubb.</p><p>The first thing she thought was how very grubby and untidy and
generally unimpressive he looked.  And the second was "How wet I am!"</p></section><footer/></body></html>