<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter IV</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03.xhtml" title="Chapter III"/><link rel="next" href="ch05.xhtml" title="Chapter V"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter IV" epub:type="chapter" id="id70364673776500"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter IV</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>A Parliament of Owls</em></h3></div></div></div><p>It is a very funny thing that the sleepier you are, the longer you take
about getting to bed; especially if you are lucky enough to have a fire
in your room.  Jill felt she couldn't even start undressing unless she
sat down in front of the fire for a bit first.  And once she had sat
down, she didn't want to get up again.  She had already said to herself
about five times, "I must go to bed", when she was startled by a tap on
the window.</p><p>She got up, pulled the curtain, and at first saw nothing but darkness.
Then she jumped and started backwards, for something very large had
dashed itself against the window, giving a sharp tap on the glass as it
did so.  A very unpleasant idea came into her head—"Suppose they have
giant moths in this country!  Ugh!"  But then the thing came back, and
this time she was almost sure she saw a beak, and that the beak had
made the tapping noise.  "It's some huge bird," thought Jill.  "Could
it be an eagle?"  She didn't very much want a visit even from an eagle,
but she opened the window and looked out.  Instantly, with a great
whirring noise, the creature alighted on the window–sill and stood
there filling up the whole window, so that Jill had to step back to
make room for it.  It was the Owl.</p><p>"Hush, hush!  Tu–whoo, tu–whoo," said the Owl.  "Don't make a noise.
Now, are you two really in earnest about what you've got to do?"</p><p>"About the lost Prince, you mean?" said Jill.  "Yes, we've got to be."
For now she remembered the Lion's voice and face, which she had nearly
forgotten during the feasting and story–telling in the hall.</p><p>"Good!" said the Owl.  "Then there's no time to waste.  You must get
away from here at once.  I'll go and wake the other human.  Then I'll
come back for you.  You'd better change those court clothes and put on
something you can travel in.  I'll be back in two twos.  Tu–whoo!"  And
without waiting for an answer, he was gone.</p><p>If Jill had been more used to adventures, she might have doubted the
Owl's word, but this never occurred to her: and in the exciting idea of
a midnight escape she forgot her sleepiness.  She changed back into
sweater and shorts—there was a guide's knife on the belt of the shorts
which might come in useful—and added a few of the things that had been
left in the room for her by the girl with the willowy hair.  She chose
a short cloak that came down to her knees and had a hood ("just the
thing, if it rains," she thought), a few handkerchiefs and a comb.
Then she sat down and waited.</p><p>She was getting sleepy again when the Owl returned.</p><p>"Now we're ready," it said.</p><p>"You'd better lead the way," said Jill.  "I don't know all these
passages yet."</p><p>"Tu–whoo!" said the Owl.  "We're not going through the castle.  That
would never do.  You must ride on me.  We shall fly."</p><p>"Oh!" said Jill, and stood with her mouth open, not much liking the
idea.  "Shan't I be far too heavy for you?"</p><p>"Tu–whoo, tu–whoo!  Don't you be a fool.  I've already carried the
other one.  Now.  But we'll put out that lamp first."</p><p>As soon as the lamp was out, the bit of the night which you saw through
the window looked less dark—no longer black, but grey.  The Owl stood
on the window–sill with his back to the room and raised his wings.
Jill had to climb onto his short fat body and get her knees under the
wings and grip tight.  The feathers felt beautifully warm and soft but
there was nothing to hold on by.  "I wonder how Scrubb liked his ride!"
thought Jill.  And just as she was thinking this, with a horrid plunge
they had left the window–sill, and the wings were making a flurry round
her ears, and the night air, rather cool and damp, was flying in her
face.</p><p>It was much lighter than she expected, and though the sky was overcast,
one patch of watery silver showed where the moon was hiding above the
clouds.  The fields beneath her looked grey, and the trees black.
There was a certain amount of wind—a hushing, ruffling sort of wind
which meant that rain was coming soon.</p><p>The Owl wheeled round so that the castle was now ahead of them.  Very
few of the windows showed lights.  They flew right over it, northwards,
crossing the river: the air grew colder, and Jill thought she could see
the white reflection of the Owl in the water beneath her.  But soon
they were on the north bank of the river, flying above wooded country.</p><p>The Owl snapped at something which Jill couldn't see.</p><p>"Oh, don't, please!" said Jill.  "Don't jerk like that.  You nearly
threw me off."</p><p>"I beg your pardon," said the Owl.  "I was just nabbing a bat.  There's
nothing so sustaining, in a small way, as a nice plump little bat.
Shall I catch you one?"</p><p>"No, thanks," said Jill with a shudder.</p><p>He was flying a little lower now and a large, black–looking object was
looming up towards them.  Jill had just time to see that it was a
tower—a partly ruinous tower, with a lot of ivy on it, she
thought—when she found herself ducking to avoid the archway of a
window, as the Owl squeezed with her through the ivied and cobwebby
opening, out of the fresh, grey night into a dark place inside the top
of the tower.  It was rather fusty inside and, the moment she slipped
off the Owl's back, she knew (as one usually does somehow) that it was
quite crowded.  And when voices began saying out of the darkness from
every direction "Tu–whoo!  Tu–whoo!" she knew it was crowded with owls.
She was rather relieved when a very different voice said:</p><p>"Is that you, Pole?"</p><p>"Is that you, Scrubb?" said Jill.</p><p>"Now," said Glimfeather, "I think we're all here.  Let us hold a
parliament of owls."</p><p>"Tu–whoo, tu–whoo.  True for you.  That's the right thing to do," said
several voices.</p><p>"Half a moment," said Scrubb's voice.  "There's something I want to say
first."</p><p>"Do, do, do," said the owls; and Jill said, "Fire ahead."</p><p>"I suppose all you chaps—owls, I mean," said Scrubb, "I suppose you
all know that King Caspian the Tenth, in his young days, sailed to the
eastern end of the world.  Well, I was with him on that journey: with
him and Reepicheep the Mouse, and the Lord Drinian and all of them.  I
know it sounds hard to believe, but people don't grow older in our
world at the same speed as they do in yours.  And what I want to say is
this, that I'm the King's man; and if this parliament of owls is any
sort of plot against the King, I'm having nothing to do with it."</p><p>"Tu–whoo, tu–whoo, we're all the King's owls too," said the owls.</p><p>"What's it all about then?" said Scrubb.</p><p>"It's only this," said Glimfeather.  "That if the Lord Regent, the
Dwarf Trumpkin, hears you are going to look for the lost Prince, he
won't let you start.  He'd keep you under lock and key sooner."</p><p>"Great Scott!" said Scrubb.  "You don't mean that Trumpkin is a
traitor?  I used to hear a lot about him in the old days, at sea.
Caspian—the King, I mean—trusted him absolutely."</p><p>"Oh no," said a voice.  "Trumpkin's no traitor.  But more than thirty
champions (knights, centaurs, good giants, and all sorts) have at one
time or another set out to look for the lost Prince, and none of them
have ever come back.  And at last the King said he was not going to
have all the bravest Narnians destroyed in the search for his son.  And
now nobody is allowed to go."</p><p>"But surely he'd let <span class="emphasis"><em>us</em></span> go," said Scrubb.  "When he knew who I was
and who had sent me."</p><p>("Sent both of us," put in Jill.)</p><p>"Yes," said Glimfeather, "I think, very likely, he would.  But the
King's away.  And Trumpkin will stick to the rules.  He's as true as
steel, but he's deaf as a post and very peppery.  You could never make
him see that this might be the time for making an exception to the
rule."</p><p>"You might think he'd take some notice of us, because we're owls and
everyone knows how wise owls are," said someone else.  "But he's so old
now he'd only say, 'You're a mere chick.  I remember you when you were
an egg.  Don't come trying to teach <span class="emphasis"><em>me</em></span>, Sir.  Crabs and crumpets!'"</p><p>This owl imitated Trumpkin's voice rather well, and there were sounds
of owlish laughter all round.  The children began to see that the
Narnians all felt about Trumpkin as people feel at school about some
crusty teacher, whom everyone is a little afraid of and everyone makes
fun of and nobody really dislikes.</p><p>"How long is the King going to be away?" asked Scrubb.</p><p>"If only we knew!" said Glimfeather.  "You see, there has been a rumour
lately that Aslan himself has been seen in the islands—in Terebinthia,
I think it was.  And the King said he would make one more attempt
before he died to see Aslan face to face again, and ask his advice
about who is to be King after him.  But we're all afraid that, if he
doesn't meet Aslan in Terebinthia, he'll go on east, to Seven Isles and
Lone Islands—and on and on.  He never talks about it, but we all know
he has never forgotten that voyage to the world's end.  I'm sure in his
heart of hearts he wants to go there again."</p><p>"Then there's no good waiting for him to come back?" said Jill.</p><p>"No, no good," said the Owl.  "Oh, what a to–do!  If only you two had
known and spoken to him at once!  He'd have arranged
everything—probably given you an army to go with you in search of the
Prince."</p><p>Jill kept quiet at this and hoped Scrubb would be sporting enough not
to tell all the owls why this hadn't happened.  He was, or very nearly.
That is, he only muttered under his breath, "Well, it wasn't my fault,"
before saying out loud:</p><p>"Very well.  We'll have to manage without it.  But there's just one
thing more I want to know.  If this owls' parliament, as you call it,
is all fair and above board and means no mischief, why does it have to
be so jolly secret—meeting in a ruin in dead of night, and all that?"</p><p>"Tu–whoo!  Tu–whoo!" hooted several owls.  "Where should we meet?  When
would anyone meet except at night?"</p><p>"You see," explained Glimfeather, "most of the creatures in Narnia have
such unnatural habits.  They do things by day, in broad blazing
sunlight (ugh!) when everyone ought to be asleep.  And, as a result, at
night they're so blind and stupid that you can't get a word out of
them.  So we owls have got into the habit of meeting at sensible hours,
on our own, when we want to talk about things."</p><p>"I see," said Scrubb.  "Well now, let's get on.  Tell us all about the
lost Prince."  Then an old owl, not Glimfeather, related the story.</p><p>About ten years ago, it appeared, when Rilian, the son of Caspian, was
a very young knight, he rode with the Queen his mother on a May morning
in the north parts of Narnia.  They had many squires and ladies with
them and all wore garlands of fresh leaves on their heads, and horns at
their sides; but they had no hounds with them, for they were maying,
not hunting.  In the warm part of the day they came to a pleasant glade
where a fountain flowed freshly out of the earth, and there they
dismounted and ate and drank and were merry.  After a time the Queen
felt sleepy, and they spread cloaks for her on the grassy bank, and
Prince Rilian with the rest of the party went a little way from her,
that their tales and laughter might not wake her.  And so, presently, a
great serpent came out of the thick wood and stung the Queen in her
hand.  All heard her cry out and rushed towards her, and Rilian was
first at her side.  He saw the worm gliding away from her and made
after it with his sword drawn.  It was great, shining, and as green as
poison, so that he could see it well: but it glided away into thick
bushes and he could not come at it.  So he returned to his mother, and
found them all busy about her.  But they were busy in vain, for at the
first glance of her face Rilian knew that no physic in the world would
do her good.  As long as the life was in her she seemed to be trying
hard to tell him something.  But she could not speak clearly and,
whatever her message was, she died without delivering it.  It was then
hardly ten minutes since they had first heard her cry.</p><p>They carried the dead Queen back to Cair Paravel, and she was bitterly
mourned by Rilian and by the King, and by all Narnia.  She had been a
great lady, wise and gracious and happy, King Caspian's bride whom he
had brought home from the eastern end of the world.  And men said that
the blood of the stars flowed in her veins.  The Prince took his
mother's death very hardly, as well he might.  After that, he was
always riding on the northern marches of Narnia, hunting for that
venomous worm, to kill it and be avenged.  No one remarked much on
this, though the Prince came home from these wanderings looking tired
and distraught.  But about a month after the Queen's death, some said
they could see a change in him.  There was a look in his eyes as of a
man who has seen visions, and though he would be out all day, his horse
did not bear the signs of hard riding.  His chief friend among the
older courtiers was the Lord Drinian, he who had been his father's
captain on that great voyage to the east parts of earth.</p><p>One evening Drinian said to the Prince, "Your Highness must soon give
over seeking the worm.  There is no true vengeance on a witless brute
as there might be on a man.  You weary yourself in vain."  The Prince
answered him, "My lord, I have almost forgotten the worm this seven
days."  Drinian asked him why, if that were so, he rode so continually
in the northern woods.  "My lord," said the Prince, "I have seen there
the most beautiful thing that was ever made."  "Fair Prince," said
Drinian, "of your courtesy let me ride with you to–morrow, that I also
may see this fair thing."  "With a good will," said Rilian.</p><p>Then in good time on the next day they saddled their horses and rode a
great gallop into the northern woods and alighted at that same fountain
where the Queen got her death.  Drinian thought it strange that the
Prince should choose that place of all places, to linger in.  And there
they rested till it came to high noon: and at noon Drinian looked up
and saw the most beautiful lady he had ever seen; and she stood at the
north side of the fountain and said no word but beckoned to the Prince
with her hand as if she bade him come to her.  And she was tall and
great, shining, and wrapped in a thin garment as green as poison.  And
the Prince stared at her like a man out of his wits.  But suddenly the
lady was gone, Drinian knew not where; and they two returned to Cair
Paravel.  It stuck in Drinian's mind that this shining green woman was
evil.</p><p>Drinian doubted very much whether he ought not to tell this adventure
to the King, but he had little wish to be a blab and a tale–bearer and
so he held his tongue.  But afterwards he wished he had spoken.  For
next day Prince Rilian rode out alone.  That night he came not back,
and from that hour no trace of him was ever found in Narnia nor any
neighbouring land, and neither his horse nor his hat nor his cloak nor
anything else was ever found.  Then Drinian in the bitterness of his
heart went to Caspian and said, "Lord King, slay me speedily as a great
traitor: for by my silence I have destroyed your son."  And he told him
the story.  Then Caspian caught up a battle–axe and rushed upon the
Lord Drinian to kill him, and Drinian stood still as a stock for the
death blow.  But when the axe was raised, Caspian suddenly threw it
away and cried out, "I have lost my queen and my son: shall I lose my
friend also?"  And he fell upon the Lord Drinian's neck and embraced
him and both wept, and their friendship was not broken.</p><p>Such was the story of Rilian.  And when it was over, Jill said, "I bet
that serpent and that woman were the same person."</p><p>"True, true, we think the same as you," hooted the owls.</p><p>"But we don't think she killed the Prince," said Glimfeather, "because
no bones―"</p><p>"We know she didn't," said Scrubb.  "Aslan told Pole he was still alive
somewhere."</p><p>"That almost makes it worse," said the oldest owl.  "It means she has
some use for him, and some deep scheme against Narnia.  Long, long ago,
at the very beginning, a White Witch came out of the North and bound
our land in snow and ice for a hundred years.  And we think this may be
one of the same crew."</p><p>"Very well, then," said Scrubb.  "Pole and I have got to find this
Prince.  Can you help us?"</p><p>"Have you any clue, you two?" asked Glimfeather.</p><p>"Yes," said Scrubb.  "We know we've got to go north.  And we know we've
got to reach the ruins of a giant city."</p><p>At this there was a greater tu–whooing than ever, and noises of birds
shifting their feet and ruffling their feathers, and then all the owls
started speaking at once.  They all explained how very sorry they were
that they themselves could not go with the children on their search for
the lost Prince.  "You'd want to travel by day, and we'd want to travel
by night," they said.  "It wouldn't do, wouldn't do."  One or two owls
added that even here in the ruined tower it wasn't nearly so dark as it
had been when they began, and that the parliament had been going on
quite long enough.  In fact, the mere mention of a journey to the
ruined city of giants seemed to have damped the spirits of those birds.
But Glimfeather said:</p><p>"If they want to go that way—into Ettinsmoor—we must take them to one
of the Marsh–wiggles.  They're the only people who can help them much."</p><p>"True, true.  Do," said the owls.</p><p>"Come on, then," said Glimfeather.  "I'll take one.  Who'll take the
other?  It must be done to–night."</p><p>"I will: as far as the Marsh–wiggles," said another owl.</p><p>"Are you ready?" said Glimfeather to Jill.</p><p>"I think Pole's asleep," said Scrubb.</p></section><footer/></body></html>