<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter V</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch04.xhtml" title="Chapter IV"/><link rel="next" href="ch06.xhtml" title="Chapter VI"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter V" epub:type="chapter" id="id70364673789800"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter V</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Puddleglum</em></h3></div></div></div><p>Jill was asleep.  Ever since the owls' parliament began she had been
yawning terribly and now she had dropped off.  She was not at all
pleased at being waked again, and at finding herself lying on bare
boards in a dusty belfry sort of place, completely dark, and almost
completely full of owls.  She was even less pleased when she heard that
they had to set off for somewhere else—and not, apparently, for
bed—on the Owl's back.</p><p>"Oh, come on, Pole, buck up," said Scrubb's voice.  "After all, it is
an adventure."</p><p>"I'm sick of adventures," said Jill crossly.</p><p>She did, however, consent to climb onto Glimfeather's back, and was
thoroughly waked up (for a while) by the unexpected coldness of the air
when he flew out with her into the night.  The moon had disappeared and
there were no stars.  Far behind her she could see a single lighted
window well above the ground; doubtless, in one of the towers of Cair
Paravel.  It made her long to be back in that delightful bedroom, snug
in bed, watching the firelight on the walls.  She put her hands under
her cloak and wrapped it tightly round her.  It was uncanny to hear two
voices in the dark air a little distance away; Scrubb and his owl were
talking to one another.  "He doesn't sound tired," thought Jill.  She
did not realise that he had been on great adventures in that world
before and that the Narnian air was bringing back to him a strength he
had won when he sailed the Eastern Seas with King Caspian.</p><p>Jill had to pinch herself to keep awake, for she knew that if she dozed
on Glimfeather's back she would probably fall off.  When at last the
two owls ended their flight, she climbed stiffly off Glimfeather and
found herself on flat ground.  A chilly wind was blowing and they
appeared to be in a place without trees.  "Tu–whoo, tu–whoo!"
Glimfeather was calling.  "Wake up, Puddleglum.  Wake up.  It is on the
Lion's business."</p><p>For a long time there was no reply.  Then, a long way off, a dim light
appeared and began to come nearer.  With it came a voice.</p><p>"Owls ahoy!" it said.  "What is it?  Is the King dead?  Has an enemy
landed in Narnia?  Is it a flood?  Or dragons?"</p><p>When the light reached them, it turned out to be that of a large
lantern.  She could see very little of the person who held it.  He
seemed to be all legs and arms.  The owls were talking to him,
explaining everything, but she was too tired to listen.  She tried to
wake herself up a bit when she realised that they were saying good–bye
to her.  But she could never afterwards remember much except that,
sooner or later, she and Scrubb were stooping to enter a low doorway
and then (oh, thank heavens) were lying down on something soft and
warm, and a voice was saying,</p><p>"There you are.  Best we can do.  You'll lie cold and hard.  Damp too,
I shouldn't wonder.  Won't sleep a wink, most likely; even if there
isn't a thunderstorm or a flood or the wigwam doesn't fall down on top
of us all, as I've known them do.  Must make the best of it―"  But
she was fast asleep before the voice had ended.</p><p>When the children woke late next morning they found that they were
lying, very dry and warm, on beds of straw in a dark place.  A
triangular opening let in the daylight.</p><p>"Where on earth are we?" asked Jill.</p><p>"In the wigwam of a Marsh–wiggle," said Eustace.</p><p>"A what?"</p><p>"A Marsh–wiggle.  Don't ask me what it is.  I couldn't see it last
night.  I'm getting up.  Let's go and look for it."</p><p>"How beastly one feels after sleeping in one's clothes," said Jill,
sitting up.</p><p>"I was just thinking how nice it was not to have to dress," said
Eustace.</p><p>"Or wash either, I suppose," said Jill scornfully.  But Scrubb had
already got up, yawned, shaken himself, and crawled out of the wigwam.
Jill did the same.</p><p>What they found outside was quite unlike the bit of Narnia they had
seen on the day before.  They were on a great flat plain which was cut
into countless little islands by countless channels of water.  The
islands were covered with coarse grass and bordered with reeds and
rushes.  Sometimes there were beds of rushes about an acre in extent.
Clouds of birds were constantly alighting in them and rising from them
again—duck, snipe, bitterns, herons.  Many wigwams like that in which
they had passed the night could be seen dotted about, but all at a good
distance from one another; for Marsh–wiggles are people who like
privacy.  Except for the fringe of the forest several miles to the
south and west of them, there was not a tree in sight.  Eastward the
flat marsh stretched to low sand–hills on the horizon, and you could
tell by the salt tang in the wind which blew from that direction that
the sea lay over there.  To the North there were low pale–coloured
hills, in places bastioned with rock.  The rest was all flat marsh.  It
would have been a depressing place on a wet evening.  Seen under a
morning sun, with a fresh wind blowing, and the air filled with the
crying of birds, there was something fine and fresh and clean about its
loneliness.  The children felt their spirits rise.</p><p>"Where has the thingummy got to, I wonder?" said Jill.</p><p>"The Marsh–wiggle," said Scrubb, as if he were rather proud of knowing
the word.  "I expect—hullo, that must be him."  And then they both saw
him, sitting with his back to them, fishing, about fifty yards away.
He had been hard to see at first because he was nearly the same colour
as the marsh and because he sat so still.</p><p>"I suppose we'd better go and speak to him," said Jill.  Scrubb nodded.
They both felt a little nervous.</p><p>As they drew nearer, the figure turned its head and showed them a long
thin face with rather sunken cheeks, a tightly shut mouth, a sharp
nose, and no beard.  He was wearing a high, pointed hat like a steeple,
with an enormously wide flat brim.  The hair, if it could be called
hair which hung over his large ears was greeny–grey, and each lock was
flat rather than round, so that they were like tiny reeds.  His
expression was solemn, his complexion muddy, and you could see at once
that he took a serious view of life.</p><p>"Good morning, Guests," he said.  "Though when I say <span class="emphasis"><em>good</em></span> I don't
mean it won't probably turn to rain or it might be snow, or fog, or
thunder.  You didn't get any sleep, I dare say."</p><p>"Yes we did, though," said Jill.  "We had a lovely night."</p><p>"Ah," said the Marsh–wiggle, shaking his head.  "I see you're making
the best of a bad job.  That's right.  You've been well brought up, you
have.  You've learned to put a good face on things."</p><p>"Please, we don't know your name," said Scrubb.</p><p>"Puddleglum's my name.  But it doesn't matter if you forget it.  I can
always tell you again."</p><p>The children sat down on each side of him.  They now saw that he had
very long legs and arms, so that although his body was not much bigger
than a dwarf's, he would be taller than most men when he stood up.  The
fingers of his hands were webbed like a frog's, and so were his bare
feet which dangled in the muddy water.  He was dressed in
earth–coloured clothes that hung loose about him.</p><p>"I'm trying to catch a few eels to make an eel stew for our dinner,"
said Puddleglum.  "Though I shouldn't wonder if I didn't get any.  And
you won't like them much if I do."</p><p>"Why not?" asked Scrubb.</p><p>"Why, it's not in reason that you should like our sort of victuals,
though I've no doubt you'll put a bold face on it.  All the same, while
I am a catching of them, if you two could try to light the fire—no
harm trying―!  The wood's behind the wigwam.  It may be wet.  You
could light it inside the wigwam, and then we'd get all the smoke in
our eyes.  Or you could light it outside, and then the rain would come
and put it out.  Here's my tinder–box.  You won't know how to use it, I
expect."</p><p>But Scrubb had learned that sort of thing on his last adventure.  The
children ran back together to the wigwam, found the wood (which was
perfectly dry) and succeeded in lighting a fire with rather less than
the usual difficulty.  Then Scrubb sat and took care of it while Jill
went and had some sort of wash—not a very nice one—in the nearest
channel.  After that she saw to the fire and he had a wash.  Both felt
a good deal fresher, but very hungry.</p><p>Presently the Marsh–wiggle joined them.  In spite of his expectation of
catching no eels, he had a dozen or so, which he had already skinned
and cleaned.  He put a big pot on, mended the fire, and lit his pipe.
Marsh–wiggles smoke a very strange, heavy sort of tobacco (some people
say they mix it with mud) and the children noticed the smoke from
Puddleglum's pipe hardly rose in the air at all.  It trickled out of
the bowl and downwards and drifted along the ground like a mist.  It
was very black and set Scrubb coughing.</p><p>"Now," said Puddleglum.  "Those eels will take a mortal long time to
cook, and either of you might faint with hunger before they're done.  I
knew a little girl—but I'd better not tell you that story.  It might
lower your spirits, and that's a thing I never do.  So, to keep your
minds off your hunger, we may as well talk about our plans."</p><p>"Yes, do let's," said Jill.  "Can you help us to find Prince Rilian?"</p><p>The Marsh–wiggle sucked in his cheeks till they were hollower than you
would have thought possible.  "Well, I don't know that you'd call it
<span class="emphasis"><em>help</em></span>," he said.  "I don't know that anyone can exactly <span class="emphasis"><em>help</em></span>.  It
stands to reason we're not likely to get very far on a journey to the
North, not at this time of the year, with the winter coming on soon and
all.  And an early winter too, by the look of things.  But you mustn't
let that make you down–hearted.  Very likely, what with enemies, and
mountains, and rivers to cross, and losing our way, and next to nothing
to eat, and sore feet, we'll hardly notice the weather.  And if we
don't get far enough to do any good, we may get far enough not to get
back in a hurry."</p><p>Both children noticed that he said "we", not "you", and both exclaimed
at the same moment.  "Are you coming with us?"</p><p>"Oh yes, I'm coming of course.  Might as well, you see.  I don't
suppose we shall ever see the King back in Narnia, now that he's once
set off for foreign parts; and he had a nasty cough when he left.  Then
there's Trumpkin.  He's failing fast.  And you'll find there'll have
been a bad harvest after this terrible dry summer.  And I shouldn't
wonder if some enemy attacked us.  Mark my words."</p><p>"And how shall we start?' said Scrubb.</p><p>"Well," said the Marsh–wiggle very slowly, "all the others who ever
went looking for Prince Rilian started from that same fountain where
the Lord Drinian saw the lady.  They went north, mostly.  And as none
of them ever came back, we can't exactly say how they got on."</p><p>"We've got to start by finding a ruined city of giants," said Jill.
"Aslan said so."</p><p>"Got to start by <span class="emphasis"><em>finding</em></span> it, have we?" answered Puddleglum.  "Not
allowed to start by <span class="emphasis"><em>looking</em></span> for it, I suppose?"</p><p>"That's what I meant, of course," said Jill.  "And then, when we've
found it―"</p><p>"Yes, when!" said Puddleglum very drily.</p><p>"Doesn't anyone know where it is?" asked Scrubb.</p><p>"I don't know about Anyone," said Puddleglum.  "And I won't say I
haven't heard of that Ruined City.  You wouldn't start from the
fountain, though.  You'd have to go across Ettinsmoor.  That's where
the Ruined City is, if it's anywhere.  But I've been as far in that
direction as most people and I never got to any ruins, so I won't
deceive you."</p><p>"Where's Ettinsmoor?" said Scrubb.</p><p>"Look over there northward," said Puddleglum, pointing with his pipe.
"See those hills and bits of cliff?  That's the beginning of
Ettinsmoor.  But there's a river between it and us; the river Shribble.
No bridges, of course.</p><p>"I suppose we can ford it, though," said Scrubb.</p><p>"Well, it has been forded," admitted the Marsh–wiggle.</p><p>"Perhaps we shall meet people on Ettinsmoor who can tell us the way,"
said Jill.</p><p>"You're right about meeting people," said Puddleglum.</p><p>"What sort of people live there?" she asked.</p><p>"It's not for me to say they aren't all right in their own way,"
answered Puddleglum.  "If you like their way."</p><p>"Yes, but what <span class="emphasis"><em>are</em></span> they?" pressed Jill.  "There are so many queer
creatures in this country.  I mean, are they animals, or birds, or
dwarfs, or what?"</p><p>The Marsh–wiggle gave a long whistle.  "Phew!" he said.  "Don't you
know?  I thought the owls had told you.  They're giants."</p><p>Jill winced.  She had never liked giants even in books, and she had
once met one in a nightmare.  Then she saw Scrubb's face, which had
turned rather green, and thought to herself, "I bet he's in a worse
funk than I am."  That made her feel braver.</p><p>"The King told me long ago," said Scrubb—"that time when I was with
him at sea—that he'd jolly well beaten those giants in war and made
them pay him tribute."</p><p>"That's true enough," said Puddleglum.  "They're at peace with us all
right.  As long as we stay on our own side of the Shribble, they won't
do us any harm.  Over on their side, on the Moor―  Still, there's
always a chance.  If we don't get near any of them, and if none of them
forget themselves, and if we're not seen, it's just possible we might
get a long way."</p><p>"Look here!" said Scrubb, suddenly losing his temper, as people so
easily do when they have been frightened.  "I don't believe the whole
thing can be half as bad as you're making out; any more than the beds
in the wigwam were hard or the wood was wet.  I don't think Aslan would
ever have sent us if there was so little chance as all that."</p><p>He quite expected the Marsh–wiggle to give him an angry reply, but he
only said, "That's the spirit, Scrubb.  That's the way to talk.  Put a
good face on it.  But we all need to be very careful about our tempers,
seeing all the hard times we shall have to go through together.  Won't
do to quarrel, you know.  At any rate, don't begin it too soon.  I know
these expeditions usually <span class="emphasis"><em>end</em></span> that way: knifing one another, I
shouldn't wonder, before all's done.  But the longer we can keep off
it―"</p><p>"Well, if you feel it's so hopeless," interrupted Scrubb, "I think
you'd better stay behind.  Pole and I can go on alone, can't we, Pole?"</p><p>"Shut up and don't be an ass, Scrubb," said Jill hastily, terrified
lest the Marsh–wiggle should take him at his word.</p><p>"Don't you lose heart, Pole," said Puddleglum.  "I'm coming, sure and
certain.  I'm not going to lose an opportunity like this.  It will do
me good.  They all say—I mean, the other wiggles all say—that I'm too
flighty; don't take life seriously enough.  If they've said it once,
they've said it a thousand times.  'Puddleglum,' they've said, 'you're
altogether too full of bobance and bounce and high spirits.  You've got
to learn that life isn't all fricasseed frogs and eel pie.  You want
something to sober you down a bit.  We're only saying it for your own
good, Puddleglum.'  That's what they say.  Now a job like this—a
journey up north just as winter's beginning, looking for a Prince that
probably isn't there, by way of a ruined city that no one has ever
seen—will be just the thing.  If that doesn't steady a chap, I don't
know what will."  And he rubbed his big frog–like hands together as if
he were talking of going to a party or a pantomime.  "And now," he
added, "let's see how those eels are getting on."</p><p>When the meal came it was delicious and the children had two large
helpings each.  At first the Marsh–wiggle wouldn't believe that they
really liked it, and when they had eaten so much that he had to believe
them, he fell back on saying that it would probably disagree with them
horribly.  "What's food for wiggles may be poison for humans, I
shouldn't wonder," he said.  After the meal they had tea, in tins (as
you've seen men having it who are working on the road), and Puddleglum
had a good many sips out of a square black bottle.  He offered the
children some of it, but they thought it very nasty.</p><p>The rest of the day was spent in preparations for an early start
to–morrow morning.  Puddleglum, being far the biggest, said he would
carry three blankets, with a large bit of bacon rolled up inside them.
Jill was to carry the remains of the eels, some biscuit, and the
tinder–box.  Scrubb was to carry both his own cloak and Jill's when
they didn't want to wear them.  Scrubb (who had learned some shooting
when he sailed to the East under Caspian) had Puddleglum's second–best
bow, and Puddleglum had his best one; though he said that what with
winds, and damp bowstrings, and bad light, and cold fingers, it was a
hundred to one against either of them hitting anything.  He and Scrubb
both had swords—Scrubb had brought the one which had been left out for
him in his room at Cair Paravel, but Jill had to be content with her
knife.  There would have been a quarrel about this, but as soon as they
started sparring the wiggle rubbed his hands and said, "Ah, there you
are.  I thought as much.  That's what usually happens on adventures."
This made them both shut up.</p><p>All three went to bed early in the wigwam.  This time the children
really had a rather bad night.  That was because Puddleglum, after
saying, "You'd better try for some sleep, you two; not that I suppose
any of us will close an eye to–night," instantly went off into such a
loud, continuous snore that, when Jill at last got to sleep, she
dreamed all night about road–drills and waterfalls and being in express
trains in tunnels.</p></section><footer/></body></html>