<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter VI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05.xhtml" title="Chapter V"/><link rel="next" href="ch07.xhtml" title="Chapter VII"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter VI" epub:type="chapter" id="id70364673805400"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter VI</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Wild Waste Lands of the North</em></h3></div></div></div><p>At about nine o'clock next morning three lonely figures might have been
seen picking their way across the Shribble by the shoals and
stepping–stones.  It was a shallow, noisy stream, and even Jill was not
wet above her knees when they reached the northern bank.  About fifty
yards ahead, the land rose up to the beginning of the moor, everywhere
steeply, and often in cliffs.</p><p>"I suppose <span class="emphasis"><em>that's</em></span> our way!" said Scrubb, pointing left and west to
where a stream flowed down from the moor through a shallow gorge.  But
the Marsh–wiggle shook his head.</p><p>"The giants mainly live along the side of that gorge," he said.  "You
might say the gorge was like a street to them.  We'll do better
straight ahead, even though it's a bit steep."</p><p>They found a place where they could scramble up, and in about ten
minutes stood panting at the top.  They cast a longing look back at the
valley–land of Narnia and then turned their faces to the North.  The
vast, lonely moor stretched on and up as far as they could see.  On
their left was rockier ground.  Jill thought that must be the edge of
the giants' gorge and did not much care about looking in that
direction.  They set out.</p><p>It was good, springy ground for walking, and a day of pale winter
sunlight.  As they got deeper into the moor, the loneliness increased:
one could hear peewits and see an occasional hawk.  When they halted in
the middle of the morning for a rest and a drink in a little hollow by
a stream, Jill was beginning to feel that she might enjoy adventures
after all, and said so.</p><p>"We haven't had any yet," said the Marsh–wiggle.</p><p>Walks after the first halt—like school mornings after break or railway
journeys after changing trains—never go on as they were before.  When
they set out again, Jill noticed that the rocky edge of the gorge had
drawn nearer.  And the rocks were less flat, more upright, than they
had been.  In fact they were like little towers of rock.  And what
funny shapes they were!</p><p>"I do believe," thought Jill, "that all the stories about giants might
have come from those funny rocks.  If you were coming along here when
it was half dark, you could easily think those piles of rock were
giants.  Look at that one, now!  You could almost imagine that the lump
on top was a head.  It would be rather too big for the body, but it
would do well enough for an ugly giant.  And all that bushy stuff—I
suppose it's heather and birds' nests, really—would do quite well for
hair and beard.  And the things sticking out on each side are quite
like ears.  They'd be horribly big, but then I daresay giants would
have big ears, like elephants.  And—o–o–o–h!―"</p><p>Her blood froze.  The thing moved.  It was a real giant.  There was no
mistaking it; she had seen it turn its head.  She had caught a glimpse
of the great, stupid, puff–cheeked face.  All the things were giants,
not rocks.  There were forty or fifty of them, all in a row; obviously
standing with their feet on the bottom of the gorge and their elbows
resting on the edge of the gorge, just as men might stand leaning on a
wall—lazy men, on a fine morning after breakfast.</p><p>"Keep straight on," whispered Puddleglum, who had noticed them too.
"Don't look at them.  And whatever you do, don't <span class="emphasis"><em>run</em></span>.  They'd all be
after us in a moment."</p><p>So they kept on, pretending not to have seen the giants.  It was like
walking past the gate of a house where there is a fierce dog, only far
worse.  There were dozens and dozens of these giants.  They didn't look
angry—or kind—or interested at all.  There was no sign that they had
seen the travellers.</p><p>Then—whizz–whizz–whizz—some heavy object came hurtling through the
air, and with a crash a big boulder fell about twenty paces ahead of
them.  And then—thud!—another fell twenty feet behind.</p><p>"Are they aiming at us?" asked Scrubb.</p><p>"No," said Puddleglum.  "We'd be a good deal safer if they were.
They're trying to hit <span class="emphasis"><em>that</em></span>—that cairn over there to the right.  They
won't hit <span class="emphasis"><em>it</em></span>, you know.  <span class="emphasis"><em>It's</em></span> safe enough; they're such very bad
shots.  They play cock–shies most fine mornings.  About the only game
they're clever enough to understand."</p><p>It was a horrible time.  There seemed no end to the line of giants, and
they never ceased hurling stones, some of which fell extremely close.
Quite apart from the real danger, the very sight and sound of their
faces and voices were enough to scare anyone.  Jill tried not to look
at them.</p><p>After about twenty–five minutes the giants apparently had a quarrel.
This put an end to the cock–shies, but it is not pleasant to be within
a mile of quarrelling giants.  They stormed and jeered at one another
in long, meaningless words of about twenty syllables each.  They foamed
and jibbered and jumped in their rage, and each jump shook the earth
like a bomb.  They lammed each other on the head with great, clumsy
stone hammers; but their skulls were so hard that the hammers bounced
off again, and then the monster who had given the blow would drop his
hammer and howl with pain because it had stung his fingers.  But he was
so stupid that he would do exactly the same thing a minute later.  This
was a good thing in the long run, for by the end of an hour all the
giants were so hurt that they sat down and began to cry.  When they sat
down, their heads were below the edge of the gorge, so that you saw
them no more; but Jill could hear them howling and blubbering and
boo–hooing like great babies even after the place was a mile behind.</p><p>That night they bivouacked on the bare moor, and Puddleglum showed the
children how to make the best of their blankets by sleeping back to
back.  (The backs keep each other warm and you can then have both
blankets on top.)  But it was chilly even so, and the ground was hard
and lumpy.  The Marsh–wiggle told them they would feel more comfortable
if only they thought how very much colder it would be later on and
further north; but this didn't cheer them up at all.</p><p>They travelled across Ettinsmoor for many days, saving the bacon and
living chiefly on the moor–fowl (they were not, of course, <span class="emphasis"><em>talking</em></span>
birds) which Eustace and the wiggle shot.  Jill rather envied Eustace
for being able to shoot; he had learned it on his voyage with King
Caspian.  As there were countless streams on the moor, they were never
short of water.  Jill thought that when, in books, people live on what
they shoot, it never tells you what a long, smelly, messy job it is
plucking and cleaning dead birds, and how cold it makes your fingers.
But the great thing was that they met hardly any giants.  One giant saw
them, but he only roared with laughter and stumped away about his own
business.</p><p>About the tenth day, they reached a place where the country changed.
They came to the northern edge of the moor and looked down a long,
steep slope into a different, and grimmer, land.  At the bottom of the
slope were cliffs: beyond these, a country of high mountains, dark
precipices, stony valleys, ravines so deep and narrow that one could
not see far into them, and rivers that poured out of echoing gorges to
plunge sullenly into black depths.  Needless to say, it was Puddleglum
who pointed out a sprinkling of snow on the more distant slopes.</p><p>"But there'll be more on the north side of them, I shouldn't wonder,"
he added.</p><p>It took them some time to reach the foot of the slope and, when they
did, they looked down from the top of the cliffs at a river running
below them from west to east.  It was walled in by precipices on the
far side as well as on their own, and it was green and sunless, full of
rapids and waterfalls.  The roar of it shook the earth even where they
stood.</p><p>"The bright side of it is," said Puddleglum, "that if we break our
necks getting down the cliff, then we're safe from being drowned in the
river."</p><p>"What about <span class="emphasis"><em>that</em></span>?" said Scrubb suddenly, pointing upstream to their
left.  Then they all looked and saw the last thing they were
expecting—a bridge.  And what a bridge, too!  It was a huge, single
arch that spanned the gorge from cliff–top to cliff–top; and the crown
of that arch was as high above the cliff–tops as the dome of St. Paul's
is above the street.</p><p>"Why, it must be a giants' bridge!" said Jill.</p><p>"Or a sorcerer's, more likely," said Puddleglum.  "We've got to look
out for enchantments in a place like this.  I think it's a trap.  I
think it'll turn into mist and melt away just when we're out on the
middle of it."</p><p>"Oh, for goodness' sake, don't be such a wet blanket," said Scrubb.
"Why on earth shouldn't it be a proper bridge?"</p><p>"Do you think any of the giants we've seen would have sense to build a
thing like that?" said Puddleglum.</p><p>"But mightn't it have been built by other giants?" said Jill.  "I mean,
by giants who lived hundreds of years ago, and were far cleverer than
the modern kind.  It might have been built by the same ones who built
the giant city we're looking for.  And that would mean we were on the
right track—the old bridge leading to the old city!"</p><p>"That's a real brain–wave, Pole," said Scrubb.  "It must be that.  Come
on."</p><p>So they turned and went to the bridge.  And when they reached it, it
certainly seemed solid enough.  The single stones were as big as those
at Stonehenge and must have been squared by good masons once, though
now they were cracked and crumbled.  The balustrade had apparently been
covered with rich carvings, of which some traces remained; mouldering
faces and forms of giants, minotaurs, squids, centipedes, and dreadful
gods.  Puddleglum still didn't trust it, but he consented to cross it
with the children.</p><p>The climb up to the crown of the arch was long and heavy.  In many
places the great stones had dropped out, leaving horrible gaps through
which you looked down on the river foaming thousands of feet below.
They saw an eagle fly through under their feet.  And the higher they
went, the colder it grew, and the wind blew so that they could hardly
keep their footing.  It seemed to shake the bridge.</p><p>When they reached the top and could look down the further slope of the
bridge, they saw what looked like the remains of an ancient giant road
stretching away before them into the heart of the mountains.  Many
stones of its pavement were missing and there were wide patches of
grass between those that remained.  And riding towards them on that
ancient road were two people of normal grown–up human size.</p><p>"Keep on.  Move towards them," said Puddleglum.  "Anyone you meet in a
place like this is as likely as not to be an enemy, but we mustn't let
them think we're afraid."</p><p>By the time they had stepped off the end of the bridge on to the grass,
the two strangers were quite close.  One was a knight in complete
armour with his visor down.  His armour and his horse were black; there
was no device on his shield and no banneret on his spear.  The other
was a lady on a white horse, a horse so lovely that you wanted to kiss
its nose and give it a lump of sugar at once.  But the lady, who rode
side–saddle and wore a long, fluttering dress of dazzling green, was
lovelier still.</p><p>"Good day, t–r–r–avellers," she cried out in a voice as sweet as the
sweetest bird's song, trilling her R's delightfully.  "Some of you are
young pilgrims to walk this rough waste."</p><p>"That's as may be, Ma'am," said Puddleglum very stiffly and on his
guard.</p><p>"We're looking for the ruined city of the giants," said Jill.</p><p>"The r–r–ruined city?" said the Lady.  "That is a strange place to be
seeking.  What will you do if you find it?"</p><p>"We've got to―" began Jill, but Puddleglum interrupted.</p><p>"Begging your pardon, Ma'am.  But we don't know you or your friend—a
silent chap, isn't he?—and you don't know us.  And we'd as soon not
talk to strangers about our business, if you don't mind.  Shall we have
a little rain soon, do you think?"</p><p>The Lady laughed: the richest, most musical laugh you can imagine.
"Well, children," she said, "you have a wise, solemn old guide with
you.  I think none the worse of him for keeping his own counsel, but
I'll be free with mine.  I have often heard the name of the giantish
City Ruinous, but never met any who would tell me the way thither.
This road leads to the burgh and castle of Harfang, where dwell the
gentle giants.  They are as mild, civil, prudent, and courteous as
those of Ettinsmoor are foolish, fierce, savage and given to all
beastliness.  And in Harfang you may or may not hear tidings of the
City Ruinous, but certainly you shall find good lodgings and merry
hosts.  You would be wise to winter there, or, at the least, to tarry
certain days for your ease and refreshment.  There you shall have
steaming baths, soft beds, and bright hearths; and the roast and the
baked and the sweet and the strong will be on the table four times in a
day."</p><p>"I say!" exclaimed Scrubb.  "That's something like!  Think of sleeping
in a bed again."</p><p>"Yes, and having a hot bath," said Jill.  "Do you think they'll ask us
to stay?  We don't know them, you see."</p><p>"Only tell them," answered the Lady, "that She of the Green Kirtle
salutes them by you, and has sent them two fair Southern children for
the Autumn Feast."</p><p>"Oh, thank you, thank you ever so much," said Jill and Scrubb.</p><p>"But have a care," said the Lady.  "On whatever day you reach Harfang,
that you come not to the door too late.  For they shut their gates a
few hours after noon, and it is the custom of the castle that they open
to none when once they have drawn bolt, how hard so ever he knock."</p><p>The children thanked her again, with shining eyes, and the Lady waved
to them.  The Marsh–wiggle took off his steeple–hat and bowed very
stiffly.  Then the silent Knight and the Lady started walking their
horses up the slope of the bridge with a great clatter of hoofs.</p><p>"Well!" said Puddleglum.  "I'd give a good deal to know where <span class="emphasis"><em>she's</em></span>
coming from and where she's going.  Not the sort you expect to meet in
the wilds of Giantland, is she?  Up to no good, I'll be bound."</p><p>"Oh rot!" said Scrubb.  "I thought she was simply super.  And think of
hot meals and warm rooms.  I do hope Harfang isn't a long way off."</p><p>"Same here," said Jill.  "And hadn't she a scrumptious dress.  And the
horse!"</p><p>"All the same," said Puddleglum, "I wish we knew a bit more about her."</p><p>"I was going to ask her all about herself," said Jill.  "But how could
I when you wouldn't tell her anything about us?"</p><p>"Yes," said Scrubb.  "And why were you so stiff and unpleasant.  Didn't
you like them?"</p><p>"Them?" said the wiggle.  "Who's them?  I only saw one."</p><p>"Didn't you see the Knight?" asked Jill.</p><p>"I saw a suit of armour," said Puddleglum.  "Why didn't he speak?"</p><p>"I expect he was shy," said Jill.  "Or perhaps he just wants to look at
her and listen to her lovely voice.  I'm sure I would if I was him."</p><p>"I was wondering," remarked Puddleglum, "what you'd really see if you
lifted up the visor of that helmet and looked inside."</p><p>"Hang it all," said Scrubb.  "Think of the shape of the armour!  What
<span class="emphasis"><em>could</em></span> be inside it except a man?"</p><p>"How about a skeleton?" asked the Marsh–wiggle with ghastly
cheerfulness.  "Or perhaps," he added as an afterthought, "nothing at
all.  I mean, nothing you could see.  Someone invisible."</p><p>"Really, Puddleglum," said Jill with a shudder, "you do have the most
horrible ideas?  How do you think of them all?"</p><p>"Oh, bother his ideas!" said Scrubb.  "He's always expecting the worst,
and he's always wrong.  Let's think about those Gentle Giants and get
on to Harfang as quickly as we can.  I wish I knew how far it is."</p><p>And now they nearly had the first of those quarrels which Puddleglum
had foretold: not that Jill and Scrubb hadn't been sparring and
snapping at each other a good deal before, but this was the first
really serious disagreement.  Puddleglum didn't want them to go to
Harfang at all.  He said that he didn't know what a giant's idea of
being "gentle" might be, and that, anyway, Aslan's signs had said
nothing about staying with giants, gentle or otherwise.  The children,
on the other hand, who were sick of wind and rain, and skinny fowl
roasted over campfires, and hard, cold earth to sleep on, were
absolutely dead set to visit the Gentle Giants.  In the end, Puddleglum
agreed to do so, but only on one condition.  The others must give an
absolute promise that, unless he gave them leave, they would not tell
the Gentle Giants that they came from Narnia or that they were looking
for Prince Rilian.  And they gave him this promise, and went on.</p><p>After that talk with the Lady things got worse in two different ways.
In the first place the country was much harder.  The road led through
endless, narrow valleys down which a cruel north wind was always
blowing in their faces.  There was nothing that could be used for
firewood, and there were no nice little hollows to camp in, as there
had been on the moor.  And the ground was all stony, and made your feet
sore by day and every bit of you sore by night.</p><p>In the second place, whatever the Lady had intended by telling them
about Harfang, the actual effect on the children was a bad one.  They
could think about nothing but beds and baths and hot meals and how
lovely it would be to get indoors.  They never talked about Aslan, or
even about the lost prince, now.  And Jill gave up her habit of
repeating the signs over to herself every night and morning.  She said
to herself, at first, that she was too tired, but she soon forgot all
about it.  And though you might have expected that the idea of having a
good time at Harfang would have made them more cheerful, it really made
them more sorry for themselves and more grumpy and snappy with each
other and with Puddleglum.</p><p>At last they came one afternoon to a place where the gorge in which
they were travelling widened out and dark fir woods rose on either
side.  They looked ahead and saw that they had come through the
mountains.  Before them lay a desolate, rocky plain: beyond it, further
mountains capped with snow.  But between them and those further
mountains rose a low hill with an irregular, flattish top.</p><p>"Look!  Look!" cried Jill, and pointed across the plain; and there,
through the gathering dusk, from beyond the flat hill, everyone saw
lights.  Lights!  Not moonlight, nor fires, but a homely cheering row
of lighted windows.  If you have never been in the wild wilderness, day
and night, for weeks, you will hardly understand how they felt.</p><p>"Harfang!" cried Scrubb and Jill in glad, excited voices; and
"Harfang," repeated Puddleglum in a dull, gloomy voice.  But he added,
"Hullo!  Wild geese!" and had the bow off his shoulder in a second.  He
brought down a good fat goose.  It was far too late to think of
reaching Harfang that day.  But they had a hot meal and a fire, and
started the night warmer than they had been for over a week.  After the
fire had gone out, the night grew bitterly cold, and when they woke
next morning, their blankets were stiff with frost.</p><p>"Never mind!" said Jill, stamping her feet.  "Hot baths to–night!"</p></section><footer/></body></html>