<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter VII</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch06.xhtml" title="Chapter VI"/><link rel="next" href="ch08.xhtml" title="Chapter VIII"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter VII" epub:type="chapter" id="id70364673820060"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter VII</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Hill of the Strange Trenches</em></h3></div></div></div><p>There is no denying it was a beast of a day.  Overhead was a sunless
sky, muffled in clouds that were heavy with snow; underfoot, a black
frost; blowing over it, a wind that felt as if it would take your skin
off.  When they got down into the plain they found that this part of
the ancient road was much more ruinous than any they had yet seen.
They had to pick their way over great broken stones and between
boulders and across rubble: hard going for sore feet.  And, however
tired they got, it was far too cold for a halt.</p><p>At about ten o'clock the first tiny snow flakes came loitering down and
settled on Jill's arm.  Ten minutes later they were falling quite
thickly.  In twenty minutes the ground was noticeably white.  And by
the end of half an hour a good steady snowstorm, which looked as if it
meant to last all day, was driving in their faces so that they could
hardly see.</p><p>In order to understand what followed, you must keep on remembering how
little they could see.  As they drew near the low hill which separated
them from the place where the lighted windows had appeared, they had no
general view of it at all.  It was a question of seeing the next few
paces ahead, and, even for that, you had to screw up your eyes.
Needless to say, they were not talking.</p><p>When they reached the foot of the hill they caught a glimpse of what
might be rocks on each side—squarish rocks, if you looked at them
carefully, but no one did.  All were more concerned with the ledge
right in front of them which barred their way.  It was about four feet
high.  The Marsh–wiggle, with his long legs, had no difficulty in
jumping onto the top of it, and he then helped the others up.  It was a
nasty wet business for them, though not for him, because the snow now
lay quite deep on the ledge.  They then had a stiff climb—Jill fell
once—up very rough ground for about a hundred yards, and came to a
second ledge.  There were four of these ledges altogether, at quite
irregular intervals.</p><p>As they struggled onto the fourth ledge, there was no mistaking the
fact that they were now at the top of the flat hill.  Up till now the
slope had given them some shelter; here, they got the full fury of the
wind.  For the hill, oddly enough, was quite as flat on top as it had
looked from a distance: a great level tableland which the storm tore
across without resistance.  In most places the snow was still hardly
lying at all, for the wind kept catching it up off the ground in sheets
and clouds, and hurling it in their faces.  And round their feet little
eddies of snow ran about as you sometimes see them doing over ice.
And, indeed, in many places, the surface was almost as smooth as ice.
But to make matters worse it was crossed and criss–crossed with curious
banks or dykes, which sometimes divided it up into squares and oblongs.
All these of course had to be climbed; they varied from two to five
feet in height and were about a couple of yards thick.  On the north
side of each bank the snow already lay in deep drifts; and after each
climb you came down into drift and got wet.</p><p>Fighting her way forward with hood up and head down and numb hands
inside her cloak, Jill had glimpses of other odd things on that
horrible tableland—things on her right that looked vaguely like
factory chimneys, and, on her left, a huge cliff, straighter than any
cliff ought to be.  But she wasn't at all interested and didn't give
them a thought.  The only things she thought about were her cold hands
(and nose and chin and ears) and hot baths and beds at Harfang.</p><p>Suddenly she skidded, slid about five feet, and found herself to her
horror sliding down into a dark, narrow chasm which seemed that moment
to have appeared in front of her.  Half a second later she had reached
the bottom.  She appeared to be in a kind of trench or groove, only
about three feet wide.  And though she was shaken by the fall, almost
the first thing she noticed was the relief of being out of the wind;
for the walls of the trench rose high above her.  The next thing she
noticed was, naturally, the anxious faces of Scrubb and Puddleglum
looking down at her from the edge.</p><p>"Are you hurt, Pole?" shouted Scrubb.</p><p>"<span class="emphasis"><em>Both</em></span> legs broken, I shouldn't wonder," shouted Puddleglum.</p><p>Jill stood up and explained that she was all right, but they'd have to
help her out.</p><p>"What is it you've fallen into?" asked Scrubb.</p><p>"It's a kind of trench, or it might be a kind of sunken lane or
something," said Jill.  "It runs quite straight."</p><p>"Yes, by Jove," said Scrubb.  "And it runs due north!  I wonder is it a
sort of road?  If it was, we'd be out of this infernal wind down there.
Is there a lot of snow at the bottom?"</p><p>"Hardly any.  It all blows over the top, I suppose."</p><p>"What happens further on?"</p><p>"Half a sec.  I'll go and see," said Jill.  She got up and walked along
the trench; but before she had gone far, it turned sharply to the
right.  She shouted this information back to the others.</p><p>"What's round the corner?" asked Scrubb.</p><p>Now it happened that Jill had the same feeling about twisty passages
and dark places underground, or even nearly underground, that Scrubb
had about the edges of cliffs.  She had no intention of going round
that corner alone; especially when she heard Puddleglum bawling out
from behind her,</p><p>"Be careful, Pole.  It's just the sort of place that might lead to a
dragon's cave.  And in a giant country, there might be giant
earth–worms or giant beetles."</p><p>"I don't think it goes anywhere much," said Jill, coming hastily back.</p><p>"I'm jolly well going to have a look," said Scrubb.  "What do you mean
by <span class="emphasis"><em>anywhere much</em></span>, I should like to know?"  So he sat down on the edge
of the trench (everyone was too wet by now to bother about being a bit
wetter) and then dropped in.  He pushed past Jill and, though he didn't
say anything, she felt sure that he knew she had funked it.  So she
followed him close, but took care not to get in front of him.</p><p>It proved, however, a disappointing exploration.  They went round the
right–hand turn and straight on for a few paces.  Here there was a
choice of ways: straight on again, or sharp to the right.  "That's no
good," said Scrubb, glancing down the right–hand turn, "that would be
taking us back—south."  He went straight on, but once more, in a few
steps, they found a second turn to the right.  But this time there was
no choice of ways, for the trench they had been following here came to
a dead end.</p><p>"No good," grunted Scrubb.  Jill lost no time in turning and leading
the way back.  When they returned to the place where Jill had first
fallen in, the Marsh–wiggle with his long arms had no difficulty in
pulling them out.</p><p>But it was dreadful to be out on top again.  Down in those narrow slits
of trenches, their ears had almost begun to thaw.  They had been able
to see clearly and breathe easily and hear each other speak without
shouting.  It was absolute misery to come back into the withering
coldness.  And it did seem hard when Puddleglum chose that moment for
saying:</p><p>"Are you still sure of those signs, Pole?  What's the one we ought to
be after, now?"</p><p>"Oh, come <span class="emphasis"><em>on</em></span>!  Bother the signs," said Pole.  "Something about
someone mentioning Aslan's name, I think.  But I'm jolly well not going
to give a recitation here."</p><p>As you see, she had got the order wrong.  That was because she had
given up saying the signs over every night.  She still really knew
them, if she troubled to think: but she was no longer so "pat" in her
lesson as to be sure of reeling them off in the right order at a
moment's notice and without thinking.  Puddleglum's question annoyed
her because, deep down inside her, she was already annoyed with herself
for not knowing the Lion's lesson quite so well as she felt she ought
to have known it.  This annoyance, added to the misery of being very
cold and tired, made her say, "Bother the signs."  She didn't perhaps
quite mean it.</p><p>"Oh, that was next, was it?" said Puddleglum.  "Now I wonder, are you
right?  Got 'em mixed, I shouldn't wonder.  It seems to me, this hill,
this flat place we're on, is worth stopping to have a look at.  Have
you noticed―"</p><p>"Oh Lor!" said Scrubb, "is this a time for stopping to admire the view?
For goodness' sake let's get on."</p><p>"Oh, look, look, look," cried Jill and pointed.  Everyone turned, and
everyone saw.  Some way off to the north, and a good deal higher up
than the tableland on which they stood, a line of lights had appeared.
This time, even more obviously than when the travellers had seen them
the night before, they were windows: smaller windows that made one
think deliciously of bedrooms, and larger windows that made one think
of great halls with fires roaring on the hearth and hot soup or juicy
sirloins smoking on the table.</p><p>"Harfang!" exclaimed Scrubb.</p><p>"That's all very well," said Puddleglum.  "But what I was saying
was―"</p><p>"Oh, shut up," said Jill crossly.  "We haven't a moment to lose.  Don't
you remember what the Lady said about their locking up so early?  We
must get there in time, we must, we must.  We'll <span class="emphasis"><em>die</em></span> if we're shut
out on a night like this."</p><p>"Well, it isn't exactly a night, not yet," began Puddleglum; but the
two children both said, "Come on," and began stumbling forward on the
slippery tableland as quickly as their legs would carry them.  The
Marsh–wiggle followed them: still talking, but now that they were
forcing their way into the wind again, they could not have heard him
even if they had wanted to.  And they didn't want.  They were thinking
of baths and beds and hot drinks; and the idea of coming to Harfang too
late and being shut out was almost unbearable.</p><p>In spite of their haste, it took them a long time to cross the flat top
of that hill.  And even when they had crossed it, there were still
several ledges to climb down on the far side.  But at last they reached
the bottom and could see what Harfang was like.</p><p>It stood on a high crag, and in spite of its many towers was more a
huge house than a castle.  Obviously, the Gentle Giants feared no
attack.  There were windows in the outside wall quite close to the
ground—a thing no one would have in a serious fortress.  There were
even odd little doors here and there, so that it would be quite easy to
get in and out of the castle without going through the courtyard.  This
raised the spirits of Jill and Scrubb.  It made the whole place look
more friendly and less forbidding.</p><p>At first the height and steepness of the crag frightened them, but
presently they noticed that there was an easier way up on the left and
that the road wound up towards it.  It was a terrible climb, after the
journey they had already had, and Jill nearly gave up.  Scrubb and
Puddleglum had to help her for the last hundred yards.  But in the end
they stood before the castle gate.  The portcullis was up and the gate
open.</p><p>However tired you are, it takes some nerve to walk up to a giant's
front door.  In spite of all his previous warnings against Harfang, it
was Puddleglum who showed most courage.</p><p>"Steady pace, now," he said.  "Don't look frightened, whatever you do.
We've done the silliest thing in the world by coming at all: but now
that we <span class="emphasis"><em>are</em></span> here, we'd best put a bold face on it."</p><p>With these words he strode forward into the gateway, stood still under
the arch where the echo would help his voice, and called out as loud as
he could.</p><p>"Ho!  Porter!  Guests who seek lodging."</p><p>And while he was waiting for something to happen, he took off his hat
and knocked off the heavy mass of snow which had gathered on its wide
brim.</p><p>"I say," whispered Scrubb to Jill.  "He may be a wet blanket, but he
has plenty of pluck—and cheek."</p><p>A door opened, letting out a delicious glow of firelight, and the
Porter appeared.  Jill bit her lips for fear she should scream.  He was
not a perfectly enormous giant; that is to say, he was rather taller
than an apple tree but nothing like so tall as a telegraph pole.  He
had bristly red hair, a leather jerkin with metal plates fastened all
over it so as to make a kind of mail shirt, bare knees (very hairy
indeed) and things like puttees on his legs.  He stooped down and
goggled at Puddleglum.</p><p>"And what sort of a creature do you call yourself," he said.</p><p>Jill took her courage in both hands.  "Please," she said, shouting up
at the giant.  "The Lady of the Green Kirtle salutes the King of the
Gentle Giants, and has sent us two Southern children and this
Marsh–wiggle (his name's Puddleglum) to your Autumn Feast.—If it's
quite convenient, of course," she added.</p><p>"O–ho!" said the Porter.  "That's quite a different story.  Come in,
little people, come in.  You'd best come into the lodge while I'm
sending word to his Majesty."  He looked at the children with
curiosity.  "Blue faces," he said.  "I didn't know they were that
colour.  Don't care about it myself.  But I daresay you look quite nice
to one another.  Beetles fancy other beetles, they do say."</p><p>"Our faces are only blue with cold," said Jill.  "We're not this colour
<span class="emphasis"><em>really</em></span>."</p><p>"Then come in and get warm.  Come in, little shrimps," said the Porter.
They followed him into the lodge.  And though it was rather terrible to
hear such a big door clang shut behind them, they forgot about it as
soon as they saw the thing they had been longing for ever since supper
time last night—a fire.  And such a fire!  It looked as if four or
five whole trees were blazing on it, and it was so hot they couldn't go
within yards of it.  But they all flopped down on the brick floor, as
near as they could bear the heat, and heaved great sighs of relief.</p><p>"Now, youngster," said the Porter to another giant who had been sitting
in the back of the room, staring at the visitors till it looked as if
his eyes would start out of his head, "run across with this message to
the House."  And he repeated what Jill had said to him.  The younger
giant, after a final stare, and a great guffaw, left the room.</p><p>"Now, Froggy," said the Porter to Puddleglum, "you look as if you
wanted some cheering up."  He produced a black bottle very like
Puddleglum's own, but about twenty times larger.  "Let me see, let me
see," said the Porter.  "I can't give you a cup or you'll drown
yourself.  Let me see.  This salt–cellar will be just the thing.  You
needn't mention it over at the House.  The silver <span class="emphasis"><em>will</em></span> keep on
getting over here, and it's not my fault."</p><p>The salt–cellar was not very like one of ours, being narrower and more
upright, and made quite a good cup for Puddleglum, when the giant set
it down on the floor beside him.  The children expected Puddleglum to
refuse it, distrusting the Gentle Giants as he did.  But he muttered,
"It's rather late to be thinking of precautions now that we're inside
and the door shut behind us."  Then he sniffed at the liquor.  "Smells
all right," he said.  "But that's nothing to go by.  Better make sure,"
and took a sip.  "Tastes all right too," he said.  "But it might do
that at the <span class="emphasis"><em>first</em></span> sip.  How does it go on?"  He took a larger sip.
"Ah!" he said.  "But is it the same all the way down?" and took
another.  "There'll be something nasty at the bottom, I shouldn't
wonder," he said, and finished the drink.  He licked his lips and
remarked to the children, "This'll be a test, you see.  If I curl up,
or burst, or turn into a lizard, or something, then you'll know not to
take anything they offer you."  But the giant, who was too far up to
hear the things Puddleglum had been saying under his breath, roared
with laughter and said, "Why, Froggy, you're a man.  See him put it
away!"</p><p>"Not a man … Marsh–wiggle," replied Puddleglum in a somewhat
indistinct voice.  "Not frog either: Marsh–wiggle."</p><p>At that moment the door opened behind them and the younger giant came
in saying, "They're to go to the throne–room at once."</p><p>The children stood up but Puddleglum remained sitting and said,
"Marsh–wiggle.  Marsh–wiggle.  Very respectable Marsh–wiggle.
Respectowiggle."</p><p>"Show them the way, young 'un," said the giant Porter.  "You'd better
carry Froggy.  He's had a drop more than's good for him."</p><p>"Nothing wrong with me," said Puddleglum.  "Not a frog.  Nothing frog
with me.  I'm a respectabiggle."</p><p>But the young giant caught him up by the waist and signed to the
children to follow.  In this undignified way they crossed the
courtyard.  Puddleglum, held in the giant's fist, and vaguely kicking
the air, did certainly look very like a frog.  But they had little time
to notice this, for they soon entered the great doorway of the main
castle—both their hearts were beating faster than usual—and, after
pattering along several corridors at a trot to keep up with the giant's
paces, found themselves blinking in the light of an enormous room,
where lamps glowed and fire roared on the hearth and both were
reflected from the gilding of roof and cornice.  More giants than they
could count stood on their left and right, all in magnificent robes;
and on two thrones at the far end, sat two huge shapes that appeared to
be the King and Queen.</p><p>About twenty feet from the thrones, they stopped.  Scrubb and Jill made
an awkward attempt at a bow (girls are not taught how to curtsey at
Experiment House) and the young giant carefully put Puddleglum down on
the floor, where he collapsed into a sort of sitting position.  With
his long limbs he looked, to tell the truth, uncommonly like a large
spider.</p></section><footer/></body></html>