<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter VIII</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch07.xhtml" title="Chapter VII"/><link rel="next" href="ch09.xhtml" title="Chapter IX"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter VIII" epub:type="chapter" id="id70364673858280"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter VIII</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The House of Harfang</em></h3></div></div></div><p>"Go on, Pole, do your stuff," whispered Scrubb.</p><p>Jill found that her mouth was so dry that she couldn't speak a word.
She nodded savagely at Scrubb.</p><p>Thinking to himself that he would never forgive her (or Puddleglum
either), Scrubb licked his lips and shouted up to the King giant.</p><p>"If you please, Sire, the Lady of the Green Kirtle salutes you by us
and said you'd like to have us for your Autumn Feast."</p><p>The giant King and Queen looked at each other, nodded to each other,
and smiled in a way that Jill didn't exactly like.  She liked the King
better than the Queen.  He had a fine, curled beard and a straight
eagle–like nose, and was really rather good–looking as giants go.  The
Queen was dreadfully fat and had a double chin and a fat, powdered
face—which isn't a very nice thing at the best of times, and of course
looks much worse when it is ten times too big.  Then the King put out
his tongue and licked his lips.  Anyone might do that: but his tongue
was so very large and red, and came out so unexpectedly, that it gave
Jill quite a shock.</p><p>"Oh, what <span class="emphasis"><em>good</em></span> children!" said the Queen.  ("Perhaps she's the nice
one after all," thought Jill.)</p><p>"Yes indeed," said the King.  "Quite excellent children.  We welcome
you to our court.  Give me your hands."</p><p>He stretched down his great right hand—very clean and with any number
of rings on the fingers, but also with terrible pointed nails.  He was
much too big to shake the hands which the children, in turn, held up to
him; but he shook the arms.</p><p>"And what's <span class="emphasis"><em>that</em></span>?" asked the King, pointing to Puddleglum.</p><p>"Reshpeckobiggle," said Puddleglum.</p><p>"Oh!" screamed the Queen, gathering her skirts close about her ankles.
"The horrid thing!  It's alive."</p><p>"He's quite all right, your Majesty, really, he is," said Scrubb
hastily.  "You'll like him much better when you get to know him.  I'm
sure you will."</p><p>I hope you won't lose all interest in Jill for the rest of the book if
I tell you that at this moment she began to cry.  There was a good deal
of excuse for her.  Her feet and hands and ears and nose were still
only just beginning to thaw; melted snow was trickling off her clothes;
she had had hardly anything to eat or drink that day; and her legs were
aching so that she felt she could not go on standing much longer.
Anyway, it did more good at the moment than anything else would have
done, for the Queen said:</p><p>"Ah, the poor child!  My lord, we do wrong to keep our guests standing.
Quick, some of you!  Take them away.  Give them food and wine and
baths.  Comfort the little girl.  Give her lollipops, give her dolls,
give her physics, give her all you can think of—possets and comfits
and caraways and lullabies and toys.  Don't cry, little girl, or you
won't be good for anything when the feast comes."</p><p>Jill was just as indignant as you and I would have been at the mention
of toys and dolls; and, though lollipops and comfits might be all very
well in their way, she very much hoped that something more solid would
be provided.  The Queen's foolish speech, however, produced excellent
results, for Puddleglum and Scrubb were at once picked up by gigantic
gentlemen–in–waiting, and Jill by a gigantic maid of honour, and
carried off to their rooms.</p><p>Jill's room was about the size of a church, and would have been rather
grim if it had not had a roaring fire on the hearth and a very thick
crimson carpet on the floor.  And here delightful things began to
happen to her.  She was handed over to the Queen's old Nurse, who was,
from the giants' point of view, a little old woman almost bent double
with age, and, from the human point of view, a giantess small enough to
go about an ordinary room without knocking her head on the ceiling.
She was very capable, though Jill did wish she wouldn't keep on
clicking her tongue and saying things like "Oh la, la!  Ups–a–daisy"
and "There's a duck" and "Now we'll be all right, my poppet".  She
filled a giant foot–bath with hot water and helped Jill into it.  If
you can swim (as Jill could) a giant bath is a lovely thing.  And giant
towels, though a bit rough and coarse, are lovely too, because there
are acres of them.  In fact you don't need to dry at all, you just roll
about on them in front of the fire and enjoy yourself.  And when that
was over, clean, fresh, warmed clothes were put on Jill: very splendid
clothes and a little too big for her, but clearly made for humans not
giantesses.  "I suppose if that woman in the green kirtle comes here,
they must be used to guests of our size," thought Jill.</p><p>She soon saw that she was right about this, for a table and chair of
the right height for an ordinary grown–up human were placed for her,
and the knives and forks and spoons were the proper size too.  It was
delightful to sit down, feeling warm and clean at last.  Her feet were
still bare and it was lovely to tread on the giant carpet.  She sank in
it well over her ankles and it was just the thing for sore feet.  The
meal—which I suppose we must call dinner, though it was nearer tea
time—was cock–a–leekie soup, and hot roast turkey, and a steamed
pudding, and roast chestnuts, and as much fruit as you could eat!</p><p>The only annoying thing was that the Nurse kept coming in and out, and
every time she came in, she brought a gigantic toy with her—a huge
doll, bigger than Jill herself, a wooden horse on wheels, about the
size of an elephant, a drum that looked like a young gasometer, and a
woolly lamb.  They were crude, badly made things, painted in very
bright colours, and Jill hated the sight of them.  She kept on telling
the Nurse she didn't want them, but the Nurse said:</p><p>"Tut–tut–tut–tut.  You'll want 'em all right when you've had a bit of a
rest, I know!  Te–he–he!  Beddy bye, now.  A precious poppet!"</p><p>The bed was not a giant bed but only a big four–poster, like what you
might see in an old–fashioned hotel; and very small it looked in that
enormous room.  She was very glad to tumble into it.</p><p>"Is it still snowing, Nurse?" she asked sleepily.</p><p>"No.  Raining now, ducky!" said the giantess.  "Rain'll wash away all
the nasty snow.  Precious poppet will be able to go out and play
to–morrow!"  And she tucked Jill up and said good–night.</p><p>I know nothing so disagreeable as being kissed by a giantess.  Jill
thought the same, but was asleep in five minutes.</p><p>The rain fell steadily all that evening and all the night, dashing
against the windows of the castle, and Jill never heard it but slept
deeply, past supper time and past midnight.  And then came the deadest
hour of the night and nothing stirred but mice in the house of the
giants.  At that hour there came to Jill a dream.  It seemed to her
that she awoke in the same room and saw the fire, sunk low and red, and
in the firelight the great wooden horse.  And the horse came of its own
will, rolling on its wheels across the carpet, and stood at her head.
And now it was no longer a horse, but a lion as big as the horse.  And
then it was not a toy lion, but a real lion, The Real Lion, just as she
had seen him on the mountain beyond the world's end.  And a smell of
all sweet–smelling things there are filled the room.  But there was
some trouble in Jill's mind, though she could not think what it was,
and the tears streamed down her face and wet the pillow.  The Lion told
her to repeat the signs, and she found that she had forgotten them all.
At that, a great horror came over her.  And Aslan took her up in his
jaws (she could feel his lips and his breath but not his teeth) and
carried her to the window and made her look out.  The moon shone
bright; and written in great letters across the world or the sky (she
did not know which) were the words UNDER ME.  After that, the dream
faded away, and when she woke, very late next morning, she did not
remember that she had dreamed at all.</p><p>She was up and dressed and had finished breakfast in front of the fire
when the Nurse opened the door and said:</p><p>"Here's pretty poppet's little friends come to play with her."</p><p>In came Scrubb and the Marsh–wiggle.</p><p>"Hullo!  Good–morning," said Jill.  "Isn't this fun?  I've slept about
fifteen hours, I believe.  I do feel better, don't you?"</p><p>"<span class="emphasis"><em>I</em></span> do," said Scrubb, "but Puddleglum says he has a headache.
Hullo!—your window has a window seat.  If we got up on that, we could
see out."  And at once they all did so: and at the first glance Jill
said, "Oh, how perfectly dreadful!"</p><p>The sun was shining and, except for a few drifts, the snow had been
almost completely washed away by the rain.  Down below them, spread out
like a map, lay the flat hill–top which they had struggled over
yesterday afternoon; seen from the castle, it could not be mistaken for
anything but the ruins of a gigantic city.  It had been flat, as Jill
now saw, because it was still, on the whole, paved, though in places
the pavement was broken.  The criss–cross banks were what was left of
the walls of huge buildings which might once have been giants' palaces
and temples.  One bit of wall, about five hundred feet high, was still
standing; it was that which she had thought was a cliff.  The things
that had looked like factory chimneys were enormous pillars, broken off
at unequal heights; their fragments lay at their bases like felled
trees of monstrous stone.  The ledges which they had climbed down on
the north side of the hill—and also, no doubt the other ledges which
they had climbed up on the south side—were the remaining steps of
giant stairs.  To crown all, in large, dark lettering across the centre
of the pavement, ran the words UNDER ME.</p><p>The three travellers looked at each other in dismay, and, after a short
whistle, Scrubb said what they were all thinking, "The second and third
signs muffed."  And at that moment Jill's dream rushed back into her
mind.</p><p>"It's my fault," she said in despairing tones.  "I—I'd given up
repeating the signs every night.  If I'd been thinking about them I
could have seen it was the city, even in all that snow."</p><p>"I'm worse," said Puddleglum.  "I <span class="emphasis"><em>did</em></span> see, or nearly.  I thought it
looked uncommonly like a ruined city."</p><p>"You're the only one who isn't to blame," said Scrubb.  "You <span class="emphasis"><em>did</em></span> try
to make us stop."</p><p>"Didn't try hard enough, though," said the Marsh–wiggle.  "And I'd no
call to be trying.  I ought to have done it.  As if I couldn't have
stopped you two with one hand each!"</p><p>"The truth is," said Scrubb, "we were so jolly keen on getting to this
place that we weren't bothering about anything else.  At least I know I
was.  Ever since we met that woman with the knight who didn't talk,
we've been thinking of nothing else.  We'd nearly forgotten about
Prince Rilian."</p><p>"I shouldn't wonder," said Puddleglum, "if that wasn't exactly what she
intended."</p><p>"What I don't quite understand," said Jill, "is how we didn't see the
lettering?  Or could it have come there since last night.  Could
he—Aslan—have put it there in the night?  I had such a queer dream."
And she told them all about it.</p><p>"Why, you chump!" said Scrubb.  "We did see it.  We got into the
lettering.  Don't you see?  We got into the letter E in ME.  That was
your sunk lane.  We walked along the bottom stroke of the E, due
north—turned to our right along the upright—came to another turn to
the right—that's the middle stroke—and then went on to the top
left–hand corner, or (if you like) the north–eastern corner of the
letter, and came back.  Like the bally idiots we are."  He kicked the
window seat savagely, and went on, "So it's no good, Pole.  I know what
you were thinking because I was thinking the same.  You were thinking
how nice it would have been if Aslan hadn't put the instructions on the
stones of the ruined city till after we'd passed it.  And then it would
have been his fault, not ours.  So likely, isn't it?  No.  We must just
own up.  We've only four signs to go by, and we've muffed the first
three."</p><p>"You mean I have," said Jill.  "It's quite true.  I've spoiled
everything ever since you brought me here.  All the same—I'm
frightfully sorry and all that—all the same, what are the
instructions?  UNDER ME doesn't seem to make much sense."</p><p>"Yes it does, though," said Puddleglum.  "It means we've got to look
for the Prince under that city."</p><p>"But how can we?" asked Jill.</p><p>"That's the question," said Puddleglum, rubbing his big, frog–like
hands together.  "How can we <span class="emphasis"><em>now</em></span>?  No doubt, if we'd had our minds on
our job when we were at the Ruinous City, we'd have been shown
how—found a little door, or a cave, or a tunnel, met someone to help
us.  Might have been (you never know) Aslan himself.  We'd have got
down under those paving–stones somehow or other.  Aslan's instructions
always work: there are no exceptions.  But how to do it <span class="emphasis"><em>now</em></span>—that's
another matter."</p><p>"Well, we shall just have to go back, I suppose," said Jill.</p><p>"Easy, isn't it?" said Puddleglum.  "We might try opening that door to
begin with."  And they all looked at the door and saw that none of them
could reach the handle, and that almost certainly no one could turn it
if they did.</p><p>"Do you think they won't let us out if we ask?" said Jill.  And nobody
said, but everyone thought, "Supposing they don't."</p><p>It was not a pleasant idea.  Puddleglum was dead against any idea of
telling the giants their real business and simply asking to be let out;
and of course the children couldn't tell without his permission,
because they had promised.  And all three felt pretty sure that there
would be no chance of escaping from the castle by night.  Once they
were in their rooms with the doors shut, they would be prisoners till
morning.  They might, of course, ask to have their doors left open, but
that would rouse suspicions.</p><p>"Our only chance," said Scrubb, "is to try to sneak away by daylight.
Mightn't there be an hour in the afternoon when most of the giants are
asleep?—and if we could steal down into the kitchen, mightn't there be
a back door open?"</p><p>"It's hardly what I call a Chance," said the Marsh–wiggle.  "But it's
all the chance we're likely to get."  As a matter of fact, Scrubb's
plan was not quite so hopeless as you might think.  If you want to get
out of a house without being seen, the middle of the afternoon is in
some ways a better time to try it than the middle of the night.  Doors
and windows are more likely to be open; and if you <span class="emphasis"><em>are</em></span> caught, you
can always pretend you weren't meaning to go far and had no particular
plans.  (It is very hard to make either giants or grown–ups believe
this if you're found climbing out of a bedroom window at one o'clock in
the morning.)</p><p>"We must put them off their guard, though," said Scrubb.  "We must
pretend we love being here and are longing for this Autumn Feast."</p><p>"That's to–morrow night," said Puddleglum.  "I heard one of them say
so."</p><p>"I see," said Jill.  "We must pretend to be awfully excited about it,
and keep on asking questions.  They think we're absolute infants
anyway, which will make it easier."</p><p>"Gay," said Puddleglum with a deep sigh.  "That's what we've got to be,
Gay.  As if we hadn't a care in the world.  Frolicsome.  You two
youngsters haven't always got very high spirits, I've noticed.  You
must watch me, and do as I do.  I'll be gay.  Like this"—and he
assumed a ghastly grin.  "And frolicsome"—here he cut a most mournful
caper.  "You'll soon get into it, if you keep your eyes on me.  They
think I'm a funny fellow already, you see.  I daresay, you two thought
I was a trifle tipsy last night, but I do assure you it was—well, most
of it was—put on.  I had an idea it would come in useful, somehow."</p><p>The children, when they talked over their adventures afterwards, could
never feel sure whether this last statement was quite strictly true;
but they were sure that Puddleglum thought it was true when he made it.</p><p>"All right.  Gay's the word," said Scrubb.  "Now, if we could only get
someone to open this door.  While we're fooling about and being gay,
we've got to find out all we can about this castle."</p><p>Luckily, at that very moment the door opened, and the giant Nurse
bustled in saying, "Now, my poppets.  Like to come and see the King and
all the court setting out on the hunting?  Such a pretty sight!"</p><p>They lost no time in rushing out past her and climbing down the first
staircase they came to.  The noise of hounds and horns and giant voices
guided them, so that in a few minutes they reached the courtyard.  The
giants were all on foot, for there are no giant horses in that part of
the world, and the giants' hunting is done on foot; like beagling in
England.  The hounds also were of normal size.  When Jill saw that
there were no horses she was at first dreadfully disappointed, for she
felt sure that the great fat Queen would never go after hounds on foot;
and it would never do to have her about the house all day.  But then
she saw the Queen in a kind of litter supported on the shoulders of six
young giants.  The silly old creature was all got up in green and had a
horn at her side.  Twenty or thirty giants, including the King, were
assembled, ready for the sport, all talking and laughing fit to deafen
you: and down below, nearer Jill's level, there were wagging tails, and
barking, and loose, slobbery mouths and noses of dogs thrust into your
hand.  Puddleglum was just beginning to strike what he thought a gay
and gamesome attitude (which might have spoiled everything if it had
been noticed) when Jill put on her most attractively childish smile,
rushed across to the Queen's litter and shouted up to the Queen.</p><p>"Oh, please!  You're not going <span class="emphasis"><em>away</em></span>, are you?  You will come back?"</p><p>"Yes, my dear," said the Queen.  "I'll be back to–night."</p><p>"Oh, <span class="emphasis"><em>good</em></span>.  How lovely!" said Jill.  "And we <span class="emphasis"><em>may</em></span> come to the feast
to–morrow night, mayn't we?  We're so longing for to–morrow night!  And
we do love being here.  And while you're out, we may run over the whole
castle and see everything, mayn't we?  Do say yes."</p><p>The Queen did say yes, but the laughter of all the courtiers nearly
drowned her voice.</p></section><footer/></body></html>