<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter X</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch09.xhtml" title="Chapter IX"/><link rel="next" href="ch11.xhtml" title="Chapter XI"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter X" epub:type="chapter" id="id70364673903560"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter X</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Travels Without the Sun</em></h3></div></div></div><p>"Who's there?" shouted the three travellers.</p><p>"I am the Warden of the Marches of Underland, and with me stand a
hundred Earthmen in arms," came the reply.  "Tell me quickly who you
are and what is your errand in the Deep Realm?"</p><p>"We fell down by accident," said Puddleglum, truthfully enough.</p><p>"Many fall down, and few return to the sunlit lands," said the voice.
"Make ready now to come with me to the Queen of the Deep Realm."</p><p>"What does she want with us?" asked Scrubb cautiously.</p><p>"I do not know," said the voice.  "Her will is not to be questioned but
obeyed."</p><p>While he said these words there was a noise like a soft explosion and
immediately a cold light, grey with a little blue in it, flooded the
cavern.  All hope that the speaker had been idly boasting when he spoke
of his hundred armed followers died at once.  Jill found herself
blinking and staring at a dense crowd.  They were of all sizes, from
little gnomes barely a foot high to stately figures taller than men.
All carried three–pronged spears in their hands, and all were
dreadfully pale, and all stood as still as statues.  Apart from that,
they were very different; some had tails and others not, some wore
great beards and others had very round, smooth faces, big as pumpkins.
There were long, pointed noses, and long, soft noses like small trunks,
and great blobby noses.  Several had single horns in the middle of
their foreheads.  But in one respect they were all alike: every face in
the whole hundred was as sad as a face could be.  They were so sad
that, after the first glance, Jill almost forgot to be afraid of them.
She felt she would like to cheer them up.</p><p>"Well!" said Puddleglum, rubbing his hands.  "This is just what I
needed.  If these chaps don't teach me to take a serious view of life,
I don't know what will.  Look at that fellow with the walrus
moustache—or that one with the―"</p><p>"Get up," said the leader of the Earthmen.</p><p>There was nothing else to be done.  The three travellers scrambled to
their feet and joined hands.  One wanted the touch of a friend's hand
at a moment like that.  And the Earthmen came all round them, padding
on large, soft feet, on which some had ten toes, some twelve, and
others none.</p><p>"March," said the Warden: and march they did.</p><p>The cold light came from a large ball on the top of a long pole, and
the tallest of the gnomes carried this at the head of the procession.
By its cheerless rays they could see that they were in a natural
cavern; the walls and roof were knobbed, twisted, and gashed into a
thousand fantastic shapes, and the stony floor sloped downward as they
proceeded.  It was worse for Jill than for the others, because she
hated dark, underground places.  And when, as they went on, the cave
got lower and narrower, and when, at last, the light–bearer stood
aside, and the gnomes, one by one, stooped down (all except the very
smallest ones) and stepped into a little dark crack and disappeared,
she felt she could bear it no longer.</p><p>"I can't go in there, I can't!  I can't!  I won't," she panted.  The
Earthmen said nothing but they all lowered their spears and pointed
them at her.</p><p>"Steady, Pole," said Puddleglum.  "Those big fellows wouldn't be
crawling in there if it didn't get wider later on.  And there's one
thing about this underground work, we shan't get any rain."</p><p>"Oh, you don't understand.  I can't," wailed Jill.</p><p>"Think how <span class="emphasis"><em>I</em></span> felt on that cliff, Pole," said Scrubb.  "You go first,
Puddleglum, and I'll come after her."</p><p>"That's right," said the Marsh–wiggle, getting down on his hands and
knees.  "You keep a grip of my heels, Pole, and Scrubb will hold on to
yours.  Then we'll all be comfortable."</p><p>"Comfortable!" said Jill.  But she got down and they crawled in on
their elbows.  It was a nasty place.  You had to go flat on your face
for what seemed like half an hour, though it may really have been only
five minutes.  It was hot.  Jill felt she was being smothered.  But at
last a dim light showed ahead, the tunnel grew wider and higher, and
they came out, hot, dirty, and shaken, into a cave so large that it
scarcely seemed like a cave at all.</p><p>It was full of a dim, drowsy radiance, so that here they had no need of
the Earthmen's strange lantern.  The floor was soft with some kind of
moss and out of this grew many strange shapes, branched and tall like
trees, but flabby like mushrooms.  They stood too far apart to make a
forest; it was more like a park.  The light (a greenish grey) seemed to
come both from them and from the moss, and it was not strong enough to
reach the roof of the cave, which must have been a long way overhead.
Across the mild, soft, sleepy place they were now made to march.  It
was very sad, but with a quiet sort of sadness like soft music.</p><p>Here they passed dozens of strange animals lying on the turf, either
dead or asleep, Jill could not tell which.  These were mostly of a
dragonish or bat–like sort; Puddleglum did not know what any of them
were.</p><p>"Do they grow here?" Scrubb asked the Warden.  He seemed very surprised
at being spoken to, but replied, "No.  They are all beasts that have
found their way down by chasms and caves, out of Overland into the Deep
Realm.  Many come down, and few return to the sunlit lands.  It is said
that they will all wake at the end of the world."</p><p>His mouth shut like a box when he had said this, and in the great
silence of that cave the children felt that they would not dare to
speak again.  The bare feet of the gnomes, padding on the deep moss,
made no sound.  There was no wind, there were no birds, there was no
sound of water.  There was no sound of breathing from the strange
beasts.</p><p>When they had walked for several miles, they came to a wall of rock,
and in it a low archway leading into another cavern.  It was not,
however, so bad as the last entrance and Jill could go through it
without bending her head.  It brought them into a smaller cave, long
and narrow, about the shape and size of a cathedral.  And here, filling
almost the whole length of it, lay an enormous man fast asleep.  He was
far bigger than any of the giants, and his face was not like a giant's,
but noble and beautiful.  His breast rose and fell gently under the
snowy beard which covered him to the waist.  A pure, silver light
(no–one saw where it came from) rested upon him.</p><p>"Who's that?" asked Puddleglum.  And it was so long since anyone had
spoken, that Jill wondered how he had the nerve.</p><p>"That is old Father Time, who once was a King in Overland," said the
Warden.  "And now he has sunk down into the Deep Realm and lies
dreaming of all the things that are done in the upper world.  Many sink
down, and few return to the sunlit lands.  They say he will wake at the
end of the world."</p><p>And out of that cave they passed into another, and then into another
and another, and so on till Jill lost count, but always they were going
downhill and each cave was lower than the last, till the very thought
of the weight and depth of earth above you was suffocating.  At last
they came to a place where the Warden commanded his cheerless lantern
to be lit again.  Then they passed into a cave so wide and dark that
they could see nothing of it except that right in front of them a strip
of pale sand ran down into still water.  And there, beside a little
jetty, lay a ship without mast or sail but with many oars.  They were
made to go on board her and led forward to the bows where there was a
clear space in front of the rowers' benches and a seat running round
inside the bulwarks.</p><p>"One thing I'd like to know," said Puddleglum, "is whether anyone from
our world—from up–a–top, I mean—has ever done this trip before?"</p><p>"Many have taken ship at the pale beaches," replied the Warden,
"and―"</p><p>"Yes, I know," interrupted Puddleglum.  "<span class="emphasis"><em>And few return to the sunlit
lands</em></span>.  You needn't say it again.  You are a chap of one idea, aren't
you?"</p><p>The children huddled close together on each side of Puddleglum.  They
had thought him a wet blanket while they were still above ground, but
down here he seemed the only comforting thing they had.  Then the pale
lantern was hung up amidships, the Earthmen sat to the oars, and the
ship began to move.  The lantern cast its light only a very short way.
Looking ahead, they could see nothing but smooth, dark water, fading
into absolute blackness.</p><p>"Oh, whatever will become of us?" said Jill despairingly.</p><p>"Now don't you let your spirits down, Pole," said the Marsh–wiggle.
"There's one thing you've got to remember.  We're back on the right
lines.  We were to go under the Ruined City, and we <span class="emphasis"><em>are</em></span> under it.
We're following the instructions again."</p><p>Presently they were given food—flat, flabby cakes of some sort which
had hardly any taste.  And after that, they gradually fell asleep.  But
when they woke, everything was just the same; the gnomes still rowing,
the ship still gliding on, still dead blackness ahead.  How often they
woke and slept and ate and slept again, none of them could ever
remember.  And the worst thing about it was that you began to feel as
if you had always lived on that ship, in that darkness, and to wonder
whether sun and blue skies and wind and birds had not been only a dream.</p><p>They had almost given up hoping or being afraid about anything when at
last they saw lights ahead: dreary lights, like that of their own
lantern.  Then, quite suddenly, one of these lights came close and they
saw that they were passing another ship.  After that they met several
ships.  Then, staring till their eyes hurt, they saw that some of the
lights ahead were shining on what looked like wharfs, walls, towers,
and moving crowds.  But still there was hardly any noise.</p><p>"By Jove," said Scrubb.  "A city!" and soon they all saw that he was
right.</p><p>But it was a queer city.  The lights were so few and far apart that
they would hardly have done for scattered cottages in our world.  But
the little bits of the place which you could see by the lights were
like glimpses of a great sea–port.  You could make out in one place a
whole crowd of ships loading or unloading; in another, bales of stuff
and warehouses; in a third, walls and pillars that suggested great
palaces or temples; and always, wherever the light fell, endless
crowds—hundreds of Earthmen, jostling one another as they padded
softly about their business in narrow streets, broad squares, or up
great flights of steps.  Their continued movement made a sort of soft,
murmuring noise as the ship drew nearer and nearer; but there was not a
song or a shout or a bell or the rattle of a wheel anywhere.  The City
was as quiet, and nearly as dark, as the inside of an ant–hill.</p><p>At last their ship was brought alongside a quay and made fast.  The
three travellers were taken ashore and marched up into the City.
Crowds of Earthmen, no two alike, rubbed shoulders with them in the
crowded streets, and the sad light fell on many sad and grotesque
faces.  But no one showed any interest in the strangers.  Every gnome
seemed to be as busy as it was sad, though Jill never found what they
were so busy about.  But the endless moving, shoving, hurrying, and the
soft pad–pad–pad went on.</p><p>At last they came to what appeared to be a great castle, though few of
the windows in it were lighted.  Here they were taken in and made to
cross a courtyard, and to climb many staircases.  This brought them in
the end to a great murkily lit room.  But in one corner of it—oh
joy!—there was an archway filled with a quite different sort of light;
the honest, yellowish, warm light of such a lamp as humans use.  What
showed by this light inside the archway was the foot of a staircase
which wound upward between walls of stone.  The light seemed to come
from the top.  Two Earthmen stood one on each side of the arch like
sentries, or footmen.</p><p>The Warden went up to these two, and said, as if it were a password:</p><p>"Many sink down to the Underworld."</p><p>"And few return to the sunlit lands," they answered, as if it were the
countersign.  Then all three put their heads together and talked.  At
last one of the two gnomes–in–waiting said, "I tell you the Queen's
grace is gone from hence on her great affair.  We had best keep these
top dwellers in strait prison till her homecoming.  Few return to the
sunlit lands."</p><p>At that moment the conversation was interrupted by what seemed to Jill
the most delightful noise in the world.  It came from above, from the
top of the staircase; and it was a clear, ringing, perfectly human
voice, the voice of a young man.</p><p>"What coil are you keeping down there, Mullugutherum?" it shouted.
"Overworlders, ha!  Bring them up to me, and that presently."</p><p>"Please it your Highness to remember," began Mullugutherum, but the
voice cut him short.</p><p>"It pleases my Highness principally to be obeyed, old mutterer.  Bring
them up," it called.</p><p>Mullugutherum shook his head, motioned to the travellers to follow and
began going up the staircase.  At every step the light increased.
There were rich tapestries hanging on the walls.  The lamplight shone
golden through thin curtains at the staircase–head.  The Earthmen
parted the curtains and stood aside.  The three passed in.  They were
in a beautiful room, richly tapestried, with a bright fire on a clean
hearth, and red wine and cut glass sparkling on the table.  A young man
with fair hair rose to greet them.  He was handsome and looked both
bold and kind, though there was something about his face that didn't
seem quite right.  He was dressed in black and altogether looked a
little bit like Hamlet.</p><p>"Welcome, Overworlders," he cried.  "But stay a moment!  I cry you
mercy!  I have seen you two fair children, and this, your strange
governor, before.  Was it not you three that met me by the bridge on
the borders of Ettinsmoor when I rode there by my Lady's side?"</p><p>"Oh … you were the black knight who never spoke?" exclaimed Jill.</p><p>"And was that lady the Queen of Underland?" asked Puddleglum, in no
very friendly voice.  And Scrubb, who was thinking the same, burst out,
"Because if it was, I think she was jolly mean to send us off to a
castle of giants who intended to eat us.  What harm had we ever done
her, I should like to know?"</p><p>"How?" said the Black Knight with a frown.  "If you were not so young a
warrior, Boy, you and I must have fought to the death on this quarrel.
I can hear no words against my Lady's honour.  But of this you may be
assured, that whatever she said to you, she said of a good intent.  You
do not know her.  She is a nosegay of all virtues, as truth, mercy,
constancy, gentleness, courage and the rest.  I say what I know.  Her
kindness to me alone, who can in no way reward her, would make an
admirable history.  But you shall know and love her hereafter.
Meanwhile, what is your errand in the Deep Lands?"</p><p>And before Puddleglum could stop her, Jill blurted out, "Please we are
trying to find Prince Rilian of Narnia."</p><p>And then she realised what a frightful risk she had taken; these people
might be enemies.  But the Knight showed no interest.</p><p>"Rilian?  Narnia?" he said carelessly.  "Narnia?  What land is that?  I
have never heard the name.  It must be a thousand leagues from those
parts of the Overworld that I know.  But it was a strange fantasy that
brought you seeking this—how do you call him?—Billian?  Trillian? in
my Lady's realm.  Indeed, to my certain knowledge, there is no such man
here."  He laughed very loudly at this, and Jill thought to herself, "I
wonder is that what's wrong with his face?  Is he a bit silly?"</p><p>"We had been told to look for a message on the stones of the City
Ruinous," said Scrubb.  "And we saw the words UNDER ME."</p><p>The Knight laughed even more heartily than before.  "You were the more
deceived," he said.  "Those words meant nothing to your purpose.  Had
you but asked my Lady, she could have given you better counsel.  For
those words are all that is left of a longer script, which in ancient
times, as she well remembers, expressed this verse:</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Though under Earth and throneless now I be,</td></tr><tr><td>Yet, while I lived, all Earth was under me.</td></tr></table><p>From which it is plain that some great king of the ancient giants, who
lies buried there, caused this boast to be cut in the stone over his
sepulchre; though the breaking up of some stones, and the carrying away
of others for new buildings, and the filling up of the cuts with
rubble, has left only two words that can still be read.  Is it not the
merriest jest in the world that you should have thought they were
written to you?"</p><p>This was like cold water down the back to Scrubb and Jill; for it
seemed to them very likely that the words had nothing to do with their
quest at all, and that they had been taken in by a mere accident.</p><p>"Don't you mind him," said Puddleglum.  "There <span class="emphasis"><em>are</em></span> no accidents.  Our
guide is Aslan; and he was there when the giant King caused the letters
to be cut, and he knew already all things that would come of them;
including <span class="emphasis"><em>this</em></span>."</p><p>"This guide of yours must be a long liver, friend," said the Knight
with another of his laughs.</p><p>Jill began to find them a little irritating.</p><p>"And it seems to me, Sir," answered Puddleglum.  "That this Lady of
yours must be a long liver too, if she remembers the verse as it was
when they first cut it."</p><p>"Very shrewd, Frog–face," said the Knight, clapping Puddleglum on the
shoulder and laughing again.  "And you have hit the truth.  She is of
divine race, and knows neither age nor death.  I am the more thankful
to her for all her infinite bounty to such a poor mortal wretch as I.
For you must know, Sirs, I am a man under most strange afflictions, and
none but the Queen's grace would have had patience with me.  Patience,
said I?  But it goes far beyond that.  She has promised me a great
kingdom in Overland, and, when I am king, her own most gracious hand in
marriage.  But the tale is too long for you to hear fasting and
standing.  Hi there, some of you!  Bring wine and Updwellers' food for
my guests.  Please you, be seated, gentlemen.  Little maiden, sit in
this chair.  You shall hear it all."</p></section><footer/></body></html>