<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch10.xhtml" title="Chapter X"/><link rel="next" href="ch12.xhtml" title="Chapter XII"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter XI" epub:type="chapter" id="id70364673884600"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter XI</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>In the Dark Castle</em></h3></div></div></div><p>When the meal (which was pigeon pie, cold ham, salad, and cakes) had
been brought, and all had drawn their chairs up to the table and begun,
the Knight continued:</p><p>"You must understand, friends, that I know nothing of who I was and
whence I came into this Dark World.  I remember no time when I was not
dwelling, as now, at the court of this all but heavenly Queen; but my
thought is that she saved me from some evil enchantment and brought me
hither of her exceeding bounty.  (Honest Frog–foot, your cup is empty.
Suffer me to refill it.)  And this seems to me the likelier because
even now I am bound by a spell, from which my Lady alone can free me.
Every night there comes an hour when my mind is most horribly changed,
and, after my mind, my body.  For first I become furious and wild and
would rush upon my dearest friends to kill them, if I were not bound.
And soon after that, I turn into the likeness of a great serpent,
hungry, fierce, and deadly.  (Sir, be pleased to take another breast of
pigeon, I entreat you.)  So they tell me, and they certainly speak
truth, for my Lady says the same.  I myself know nothing of it, for
when my hour is past I awake forgetful of all that vile fit and in my
proper shape and sound mind—saving that I am somewhat wearied.
(Little lady, eat one of these honey cakes, which are brought for me
from some barbarous land in the far south of the world.)  Now the
Queen's majesty knows by her art that I shall be freed from this
enchantment when once she has made me king of a land in the Overworld
and set its crown upon my head.  The land is already chosen and the
very place of our breaking out.  Her Earthmen have worked day and night
digging a way beneath it, and have now gone so far and so high that
they tunnel not a score of feet beneath the very grass on which the
Updwellers of that country walk.  It will be very soon now that those
Uplanders' fate will come upon them.  She herself is at the diggings
to–night, and I expect a message to go to her.  Then the thin roof of
earth which still keeps me from my kingdom will be broken through, and
with her to guide me and a thousand Earthmen at my back, I shall ride
forth in arms, fall suddenly on our enemies, slay their chief men, cast
down their strong places, and doubtless be their crowned king within
four and twenty hours."</p><p>"It's a bit rough luck on them, isn't it?" said Scrubb.</p><p>"Thou art a lad of a wondrous, quick–working wit!" exclaimed the
Knight.  "For, on my honour, I had never thought of it so before.  I
see your meaning."  He looked slightly, very slightly troubled for a
moment or two; but his face soon cleared and he broke out, with another
of his loud laughs, "But fie on gravity!  Is it not the most comical
and ridiculous thing in the world to think of them all going about
their business and never dreaming that under their peaceful fields and
floors, only a fathom down, there is a great army ready to break out
upon them like a fountain!  And they never to have suspected!  Why,
they themselves, when once the first smart of their defeat is over, can
hardly choose but laugh at the thought!"</p><p>"I don't think it's funny at all," said Jill.  "I think you'll be a
wicked tyrant."</p><p>"What?" said the Knight, still laughing and patting her head in a quite
infuriating fashion.  "Is our little maid a deep politician?  But never
fear, sweetheart.  In ruling that land, I shall do all by the counsel
of my Lady, who will then be my Queen too.  Her word shall be my law,
even as my word will be law to the people we have conquered."</p><p>"Where I come from," said Jill, who was disliking him more every
minute, "they don't think much of men who are bossed about by their
wives."</p><p>"Shalt think otherwise when thou hast a man of thine own, I warrant
you," said the Knight, apparently thinking this very funny.  "But with
my Lady, it is another matter.  I am well content to live by her word,
who has already saved me from a thousand dangers.  No mother has taken
pains more tenderly for her child, than the Queen's grace has for me.
Why, look you, amid all her cares and business, she rideth out with me
in the Overworld many a time and oft to accustom my eyes to the
sunlight.  And then I must go fully armed and with visor down, so that
no man may see my face, and I must speak to no–one.  For she has found
out by art magical that this would hinder my deliverance from the
grievous enchantment I lie under.  Is not that a lady worthy of a man's
whole worship?"</p><p>"Sounds a very nice lady indeed," said Puddelglum in a voice which
meant exactly the opposite.</p><p>They were thoroughly tired of the Knight's talk before they had
finished supper.  Puddleglum was thinking, "I wonder what game that
witch is really playing with this young fool."  Scrubb was thinking,
"He's a great baby, really: tied to that woman's apron strings; he's a
sap."  And Jill was thinking, "He's the silliest, most conceited,
selfish pig I've met for a long time."  But when the meal was over, the
Knight's mood had changed.  There was no more laughter about him.</p><p>"Friends," he said, "my hour is now very near.  I am ashamed that you
should see me yet I dread being left alone.  They will come in
presently and bind me hand and foot to yonder chair.  Alas, so it must
be: for in my fury, they tell me, I would destroy all that I could
reach."</p><p>"I say," said Scrubb, "I'm awfully sorry about your enchantment of
course, but what will those fellows do to us when they come to bind
you?  They talked of putting us in prison.  And we don't like all those
dark places very much.  We'd much rather stay here till you're … 
better … if we may."</p><p>"It is well thought of," said the Knight.  "By custom none but the
Queen herself remains with me in my evil hour.  Such is her tender care
for my honour that she would not willingly suffer any ears but her own
to hear the words I utter in that frenzy.  But I could not easily
persuade my attendant gnomes that you should be left with me.  And I
think I hear their soft feet even now upon the stairs.  Go through
yonder door: it leads into my other apartments.  And there, either
await my coming when they have unbound me; or, if you will, return and
sit with me in my ravings."</p><p>They followed his directions and passed out of the room by a door which
they had not yet seen opened.  It brought them, they were pleased to
see, not into darkness but into a lighted corridor.  They tried various
doors and found (what they very badly needed) water for washing and
even a looking glass.  "He never offered us a wash before supper," said
Jill, drying her face.  "Selfish, self–centred pig."</p><p>"Are we going back to watch the enchantment, or shall we stay here?"
said Scrubb.</p><p>"Stay here, I vote," said Jill.  "I'd much rather not see it."  But she
felt a little inquisitive all the same.</p><p>"No, go back," said Puddleglum.  "We may pick up some information, and
we need all we can get.  I am sure that Queen is a witch and an enemy.
And those Earthmen would knock us on the head as soon as look at us.
There's a stronger smell of danger and lies and magic and treason about
this land than I've ever smelled before.  We need to keep our eyes and
ears open."</p><p>They went back down the corridor and gently pushed the door open, "It's
all right," said Scrubb, meaning that there were no Earthmen about.
Then they all came back into the room where they had supped.</p><p>The main door was now shut, concealing the curtain between which they
had first entered.  The knight was seated in a curious silver chair, to
which he was bound by his ankles, his knees, his elbows, his wrists and
his waist.  There was sweat on his forehead and his face was filled
with anguish.</p><p>"Come in, friends," he said, glancing quickly up.  "The fit is not yet
upon me.  Make no noise, for I told that prying chamberlain that you
were in bed.  Now… I can feel it coming.  Quick!  Listen while I am
master of myself.  When the fit is upon me, it well may be that I shall
beg and implore you, with entreaties and threatenings, to loosen my
bonds.  They say I do.  I shall call upon you by all that is most dear
and most dreadful.  But do not listen to me.  Harden your hearts and
stop your ears.  For while I am bound you are safe.  But if once I were
up and out of this chair, then first would come my fury, and after
that"—he shuddered—"the change into a loathsome serpent."</p><p>"There's no fear of our loosing you," said Puddleglum.  "We've no wish
to meet wild men; or serpents either."</p><p>"I should think not," said Scrubb and Jill together.</p><p>"All the same," added Puddleglum in a whisper.  "Don't let's be too
sure.  Let's be on our guard.  We've muffed everything else, you know.
He'll be cunning, I shouldn't wonder, once he gets started.  Can we
trust one another?  Do we all promise that whatever he says we don't
touch those cords?  <span class="emphasis"><em>Whatever</em></span> he says, mind you?"</p><p>"Rather!" said Scrubb.</p><p>"There's nothing in the world he can say or do that'll make me change
my mind," said Jill.</p><p>"Hush!  Something's happening," said Puddleglum.</p><p>The Knight was moaning.  His face was as pale as putty, and he writhed
in his bonds.  And whether because she was sorry for him, or for some
other reason, Jill thought that he looked a nicer sort of man than he
had looked before.</p><p>"Ah," he groaned.  "Enchantments, enchantments … the heavy, tangled,
cold, clammy web of evil magic.  Buried alive.  Dragged down under the
earth, down into the sooty blackness … how many years is it? … Have
I lived ten years, or a thousand years, in the pit?  Maggotmen all
around me.  Oh, have mercy.  Let me out, let me go back.  Let me feel
the wind and see the sky … There used to be a little pool.  When you
looked down into it you could see all the trees growing upside–down in
the water, all green, and below them, deep, very deep, the blue sky."</p><p>He had been speaking in a low voice; now he looked up, fixed his eyes
upon them, and said loud and clear:</p><p>"Quick!  I am sane now.  Every night I am sane.  If only I could get
out of this enchanted chair, it would last.  I should be a man again.
But every night they bind me, and so every night my chance is gone.
But you are not enemies.  I am not <span class="emphasis"><em>your</em></span> prisoner.  Quick!  Cut these
cords."</p><p>"Stand fast!  Steady," said Puddleglum to the two children.</p><p>"I beseech you to hear me," said the Knight, forcing himself to speak
calmly.  "Have they told you that if I am released from this chair I
shall kill you and become a serpent?  I see by your faces that they
have.  It is a lie.  It is at this hour that I am in my right mind: it
is all the rest of the day that I am enchanted.  You are not Earthmen
nor witches.  Why should you be on their side?  Of your courtesy, cut
my bonds."</p><p>"Steady!  Steady!  Steady!" said the three travellers to one another.</p><p>"Oh, you have hearts of stone," said the Knight.  "Believe me, you look
upon a wretch who has suffered almost more than any mortal heart can
bear.  What wrong have I ever done you, that you should side with my
enemies to keep me in such miseries?  And the minutes are slipping
past.  <span class="emphasis"><em>Now</em></span> you can save me; when this hour has passed, I shall be
witless again—the toy and lap–dog, nay, more likely the pawn and tool,
of the most devilish sorceress that ever planned the woe of men.  And
this night, of all nights, when she is away!  You take from me a chance
that may never come again."</p><p>"This is dreadful.  I do wish we'd stayed away till it was over," said
Jill.</p><p>"Steady!" said Puddleglum.</p><p>The prisoner's voice was now rising into a shriek.  "Let me go, I say.
Give me my sword.  My sword!  Once I am free I shall take such revenge
on Earthmen that Underland will talk of it for a thousand years!"</p><p>"Now the frenzy is beginning," said Scrubb.  "I hope those knots are
all right."</p><p>"Yes," said Puddleglum.  "He'd have twice his natural strength if he
got free now.  And I'm not clever with my sword.  He'd get us both, I
shouldn't wonder; and then Pole on her own would be left to tackle the
snake."</p><p>The prisoner was now so straining at his bonds that they cut into his
wrists and ankles.  "Beware," he said.  "Beware.  One night I <span class="emphasis"><em>did</em></span>
break them.  But the witch was there that time.  You will not have her
to help you to–night.  Free me now, and I am your friend.  I'm your
mortal enemy else."</p><p>"Cunning, isn't he?" said Puddleglum.</p><p>"Once and for all," said the prisoner, "I adjure you to set me free.
By all fears and all loves, by the bright skies of Overland, by the
great Lion, by Aslan himself, I charge you―"</p><p>"Oh!" cried the three travellers as though they had been hurt.  "It's
the sign," said Puddleglum.  "It was the <span class="emphasis"><em>words</em></span> of the sign," said
Scrubb more cautiously.  "Oh, what <span class="emphasis"><em>are</em></span> we to do?" said Jill.</p><p>It was a dreadful question.  What had been the use of promising one
another that they would not on any account set the Knight free, if they
were now to do so the first time he happened to call upon a name they
really cared about?  On the other hand, what had been the use of
learning the signs if they weren't going to obey them?  Yet could Aslan
have really meant them to unbind anyone—even a lunatic—who asked it
in his name?  Could it be a mere accident?  Or how if the Queen of the
Underworld knew all about the signs and had made the Knight learn this
name simply in order to entrap them?  But then, supposing this was the
real sign? … They had muffed three already; they daren't muff the
fourth.</p><p>"Oh, if only we knew!" said Jill.</p><p>"I think we do know," said Puddleglum.</p><p>"Do you mean you think everything will come right if we do untie him?"
said Scrubb.</p><p>"I don't know about that," said Puddleglum.  "You see, Aslan didn't
tell Pole what would happen.  He only told her what to do.  That fellow
will be the death of us once he's up, I shouldn't wonder.  But that
doesn't let us off following the sign."</p><p>They all stood looking at one another with bright eyes.  It was a
sickening moment.  "All right!" said Jill suddenly.  "Let's get it
over.  Good–bye, everyone…!"  They all shook hands.  The Knight was
screaming by now; there was foam on his cheeks.</p><p>"Come on, Scrubb," said Puddleglum.  He and Scrubb drew their swords
and went over to the captive.</p><p>"In the name of Aslan," they said and began methodically cutting the
cords.  The instant the prisoner was free, he crossed the room in a
single bound, seized his own sword (which had been taken from him and
laid on the table), and drew it.</p><p>"You first!" he cried and fell upon the silver chair.  That must have
been a good sword.  The silver gave way before its edge like string,
and in a moment a few twisted fragments, shining on the floor, were all
that was left.  But as the chair broke, there came from it a bright
flash, a sound like small thunder, and (for one moment) a loathsome
smell.</p><p>"Lie there, vile engine of sorcery," he said, "lest your mistress
should ever use you for another victim."  Then he turned and surveyed
his rescuers; and the something wrong, whatever it was, had vanished
from his face.</p><p>"What?" he cried, turning to Puddleglum.  "Do I see before me a
Marsh–wiggle—a real, live, honest, Narnian Marsh–wiggle?"</p><p>"Oh, so you <span class="emphasis"><em>have</em></span> heard of Narnia after all?" said Jill.</p><p>"Had I forgotten it when I was under the spell?" asked the Knight.
"Well, that and all other bedevilments are now over.  You may well
believe that I know Narnia, for I am Rilian, Prince of Narnia, and
Caspian the great King is my father."</p><p>"Your Royal Highness," said Puddleglum, sinking on one knee (and the
children did the same), "we have come hither for no other end than to
seek you."</p><p>"And who are you, my other deliverers?" said the Prince to Scrubb and
Jill.</p><p>"We were sent by Aslan himself from beyond the world's end to seek your
Highness," said Scrubb.  "I am Eustace who sailed with him to the
island of Ramandu."</p><p>"I owe all three of you a greater debt than I can ever pay," said
Prince Rilian.  "But my father?  Is he yet alive?"</p><p>"He sailed east again before we left Narnia, my lord," said Puddleglum.
"But your Highness must consider that the King is very old.  It is ten
to one his Majesty must die on the voyage."</p><p>"He is old, you say.  How long then have I been in the power of the
witch?"</p><p>"It is more than ten years since your Highness was lost in the woods at
the north side of Narnia."</p><p>"Ten years!" said the Prince, drawing his hand across his face as if to
rub away the past.  "Yes, I believe you.  For now that I am myself I
can remember that enchanted life, though while I was enchanted I could
not remember my true self.  And now, fair friends—but wait!  I hear
their feet (does it not sicken a man, that padding woolly tread!
faugh!) on the stairs.  Lock the door, boy.  Or stay.  I have a better
thought than that.  I will fool these Earthmen, if Aslan gives me the
wit.  Take your cue from me."</p><p>He walked resolutely to the door and flung it wide open.</p></section><footer/></body></html>