<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XIII</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch12.xhtml" title="Chapter XII"/><link rel="next" href="ch14.xhtml" title="Chapter XIV"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter XIII" epub:type="chapter" id="id70364673930860"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter XIII</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Underland Without the Queen</em></h3></div></div></div><p>All felt that they had earned what Scrubb called a "breather".  The
Witch had locked the door and told the Earthmen not to disturb her, so
there was no danger of interruption for the present.  Their first
business was, of course, Puddleglum's burnt foot.  A couple of clean
shirts from the Prince's bedroom, torn into strips, and well greased on
the inside with butter and salad oil off the supper table, made a
fairly good dressing.  When this had been applied, they all sat down
and had a little refreshment, and discussed plans for escaping from the
Underworld.</p><p>Rilian explained that there were quite a lot of outlets by which one
could get to the surface; he had been taken out through most of them at
one time or another.  But he had never gone out alone, only with the
Witch; and he had always reached these outlets by going in a ship
across the Sunless Sea.  What the Earthmen would say if he went down to
the harbour without the Witch, and with four strangers, and simply
ordered a ship, no–one could guess.  But most likely they would ask
awkward questions.  On the other hand the new outlet, the one for the
invasion of Overworld, was on this side of the sea, and only a few
miles away.  The Prince knew that it was nearly finished; only a few
feet of earth divided the diggings from the outer air.  It was even
possible that it had now been quite finished.  Perhaps the Witch had
come back to tell him this and to start the attack.  Even if it was
not, they could probably dig themselves out by that route in a few
hours—if they could only get there without being stopped, and if only
they found the diggings unguarded.  But those were the difficulties.</p><p>"If you ask me―" began Puddleglum, when Scrubb interrupted.</p><p>"I say," he asked, "what's that noise?"</p><p>"I've been wondering that for some time!" said Jill.</p><p>They had all, in fact, been hearing the noise but it had begun and
increased so gradually that they did not know when they had first
noticed it.  For a time it had been only a vague disquiet like gentle
winds, or traffic very far away.  Then it swelled to a murmur like the
sea.  Then came rumblings and rushings.  Now there seemed to be voices
as well and also a steady roaring that was not voices.</p><p>"By the Lion," said Prince Rilian, "it seems this silent land has found
a tongue at last."  He rose, walked to the window, and drew aside the
curtains.  The others crowded round him to look out.</p><p>The very first thing they noticed was a great red glow.  Its reflection
made a red patch on the roof of the Underworld thousands of feet above
them, so that they could see a rocky ceiling which had perhaps been
hidden in darkness ever since the world was made.  The glow itself came
from the far side of the city so that many buildings, grim and great,
stood up blackly against it.  But it also cast its light down many
streets that ran from it towards the castle.  And in those streets
something very strange was going on.  The closely–packed, silent crowds
of Earthmen had vanished.  Instead, there were figures darting about by
ones, or twos, or threes.  They behaved like people who do not want to
be seen: lurking in shadow behind buttresses or in doorways, and then
moving quickly across the open into fresh places of hiding.  But the
strangest thing of all, to anyone who knew the gnomes, was the noise.
Shouts and cries came from all directions.  But from the harbour there
came a low, rumbling roar which grew steadily louder and was already
shaking the whole city.</p><p>"What's happened to the Earthmen?" said Scrubb.  "Is it <span class="emphasis"><em>them</em></span>
shouting?"</p><p>"'Tis hardly possible," said the Prince.  "I never heard one of the
rascals so much as speak with a loud voice in all the weary years of my
bondage.  Some new devilry, I don't doubt."</p><p>"And what is that red light over there?" asked Jill.  "Is something on
fire?"</p><p>"If you ask me," said Puddleglum, "I should say that was the central
fires of the Earth breaking out to make a new volcano.  We'll be in the
middle of it, I shouldn't wonder."</p><p>"Look at that ship!" said Scrubb.  "Why's it coming on so quickly?
No–one's rowing it."</p><p>"Look, look!" said the Prince.  "The ship is already far this side of
the harbour—it is in the street.  Look!  All the ships are driving
into the city!  By my head, the sea's rising.  The flood is upon us.
Aslan be praised, this castle stands on high ground.  But the water
comes on grimly fast."</p><p>"Oh, what can be happening?" cried Jill.  "Fire and water and all those
people dodging about the streets."</p><p>"I'll tell you what it is," said Puddleglum.  "That Witch has laid a
train of magic spells so that whenever she was killed, at that same
moment her whole kingdom would fall to pieces.  She's the sort that
wouldn't so much mind dying herself if she knew that the chap who
killed her was going to be burned, or buried, or drowned five minutes
later."</p><p>"Hast hit it, friend wiggle," said the Prince.  "When our swords hacked
off the Witch's head, that stroke ended all her magic works, and now
the Deep Lands are falling to pieces.  We are looking on the end of
Underworld."</p><p>"That's it, Sir," said Puddleglum.  "Unless it should happen to be the
end of the whole world."</p><p>"But are we just going to stay here and—wait?" gasped Jill.</p><p>"Not by my counsel," said the Prince.  "I would save my horse,
Coalblack, and the Witch's Snowflake (a noble beast and worthy of a
better mistress) which are both stabled in the courtyard.  After that,
let us make shift to get out to high ground and pray that we shall find
an outlet.  The horses can carry two each at need, and if we put them
to it they may outstrip the flood."</p><p>"Will your Highness not put on armour?" asked Puddleglum.  "I don't
like the look of <span class="emphasis"><em>those</em></span>"—and he pointed down to the street.  Everyone
looked down.  Dozens of creatures (and now that they were close, they
obviously were Earthmen) were coming up from the direction of the
harbour.  But they were not moving like an aimless crowd.  They behaved
like modern soldiers in an attack, making rushes and taking cover,
anxious not to be seen from the castle windows.</p><p>"I dare not see the inside of that armour again," said the Prince.  "I
rode in it as in a movable dungeon, and it stinks of magic and slavery.
But I will take the shield."</p><p>He left the room and returned with a strange light in his eyes a moment
later.</p><p>"Look, friends," he said, holding out the shield towards them.  "An
hour ago it was black and without device; and now, this."  The shield
had turned bright as silver, and on it, redder than blood or cherries,
was the figure of the Lion.</p><p>"Doubtless," said the Prince, "this signifies that Aslan will be our
good lord, whether he means us to live or die.  And all's one, for
that.  Now, by my counsel, we shall all kneel and kiss his likeness,
and then all shake hands one with another, as true friends that may
shortly be parted.  And then, let us descend into the city and take the
adventure that is sent us."</p><p>And they all did as the Prince had said.  But when Scrubb shook hands
with Jill, he said, "So long, Jill.  Sorry I've been a funk and so
ratty.  I hope you get safe home," and Jill said, "So long, Eustace.
And I'm sorry I've been such a pig."  And this was the first time they
had ever used Christian names, because one didn't do it at school.</p><p>The Prince unlocked the door and they all went down the stairs: three
of them with drawn swords, and Jill with drawn knife.  The attendants
had vanished and the great room at the foot of the Prince's stairs was
empty.  The grey, doleful lamps were still burning and by their light
they had no difficulty in passing gallery after gallery and descending
stairway after stairway.  The noises from outside the castle were not
so easily heard here as they had been in the room above.  Inside the
house all was still as death, and deserted.  It was as they turned a
corner into the great hall on the ground floor that they met their
first Earthman—a fat, whitish creature with a very pig–like face who
was gobbling up all the remains of food on the tables.  It squealed
(the squeal also was very like a pig's) and darted under a bench,
whisking its long tail out of Puddleglum's reach in the nick of time.
Then it rushed away through the far door too quickly to be followed.</p><p>From the hall they came out into the courtyard.  Jill, who went to a
riding school in the holidays, had just noticed the smell of a stable
(a very nice, honest, homely smell it is to meet in a place like
Underland) when Eustace said, "Great Scott!  Look at that!"  A
magnificent rocket had risen from somewhere beyond the castle walls and
broken into green stars.</p><p>"Fireworks!" said Jill in a puzzled voice.</p><p>"Yes," said Eustace, "but you can't imagine those Earth people letting
them off for fun!  It must be a signal."</p><p>"And means no good to us, I'll be bound," said Puddleglum.</p><p>"Friends," said the Prince, "when once a man is launched on such an
adventure as this, he must bid farewell to hopes and fears, otherwise
death or deliverance will both come too late to save his honour and his
reason.  Ho, my beauties" (he was now opening the stable door).  "Hey,
cousins!  Steady, Coalblack!  Softly now, Snowflake!  You are not
forgotten."</p><p>The horses were both frightened by the strange lights and the noises.
Jill, who had been so cowardly about going through a black hole between
one cave and another, went in without fear between the stamping and
snorting beasts, and she and the Prince had them saddled and bridled in
a few minutes.  Very fine they looked as they came out into the
courtyard, tossing their heads.  Jill mounted Snowflake, and Puddleglum
got up behind her.  Eustace got up behind the Prince on Coalblack.
Then with a great echo of hoofs, they rode out of the main gateway into
the street.</p><p>"Not much danger of being burnt.  That's the bright side of it,"
observed Puddleglum, pointing to their right.  There, hardly a hundred
yards away, lapping against the walls of the houses, was water.</p><p>"Courage!" said the Prince.  "The road there goes down steeply.  That
water has climbed only half up the greatest hill in the city.  It might
come so near in the first half–hour and come no nearer in the next two.
My fear is more of that―" and he pointed with his sword to a great
tall Earthman with boar's tusks, followed by six others of assorted
shapes and sizes who had just dashed out of a side street and stepped
into the shadow of the houses where no one could see them.</p><p>The Prince led them, aiming always in the direction of the glowing red
light but a little to the left of it.  His plan was to get round the
fire (if it was a fire) onto high ground, in hope that they might find
their way to the new diggings.  Unlike the other three, he seemed to be
almost enjoying himself.  He whistled as he rode, and sang snatches of
an old song about Corin Thunder–fist of Archenland.  The truth is, he
was so glad at being free from his long enchantment that all dangers
seemed a game in comparison.  But the rest found it an eerie journey.</p><p>Behind them was the sound of clashing and entangled ships, and the
rumble of collapsing buildings.  Overhead was the great patch of lurid
light on the roof of the Underworld.  Ahead was the mysterious glow,
which did not seem to grow any bigger.  From the same direction came a
continual hubbub of shouts, screams, cat–calls, laughter, squeals, and
bellowings; and fireworks of all sorts rose in the dark air.  No one
could guess what they meant.  Nearer to them, the city was partly lit
up by the red glow, and partly by the very different light of the
dreary Gnome lamps.  But there were many places where neither of these
lights fell, and those places were jet–black.  And in and out of those
places the shapes of Earthmen were darting and slipping all the time,
always with their eyes fixed on the travellers, always trying to keep
out of sight themselves.  There were big faces and little faces, huge
eyes like fishes' eyes and little eyes like bears'.  There were
feathers and bristles, horns and tusks, noses like whipcord and chins
so long that they looked like beards.  Every now and then a group of
them would get too big or come too near.  Then the Prince would
brandish his sword and make a show of charging them.  And the
creatures, with all manner of hootings, squeakings, and cluckings,
would dive away into the darkness.</p><p>But when they had climbed many steep streets and were far away from the
flood, and almost out of the town on the inland side, it began to be
more serious.  They were now close to the red glow and nearly on a
level with it, though they still could not see what it really was.  But
by its light they could see their enemies more clearly.
Hundreds—perhaps a few thousands—of gnomes were all moving towards
it.  But they were doing so in short rushes, and whenever they stopped,
they turned and faced the travellers.</p><p>"If your Highness asked me," said Puddleglum, "I'd say those fellows
were meaning to cut us off in front."</p><p>"That was my thought too, Puddleglum," said the Prince.  "And we can
never fight our way through so many.  Hark you!  Let us ride forth
close by the edge of yonder house.  And even as we reach it, do you
slip off into its shadow.  The Lady and I will go forward a few paces.
Some of these devils will follow us, I doubt not; they are thick behind
us.  Do you, who have long arms, take one alive if you may, as it
passes your ambush.  We may get a true tale of it or learn what is
their quarrel against us."</p><p>"But won't the others all come rushing at us to rescue the one we
catch," said Jill in a voice not so steady as she tried to make it.</p><p>"Then, Madam," said the Prince, "you shall see us die fighting around
you, and you must commend yourself to the Lion.  Now, good Puddleglum."</p><p>The Marsh–wiggle slipped off into the shadow as quickly as a cat.  The
others, for a sickening minute or so, went forward at a walk.  Then
suddenly from behind them there broke out a series of blood–curdling
screams, mixed with the familiar voice of Puddleglum, saying, "Now
then!  Don't cry out before you're hurt, or you will be hurt, see?
Anyone would think it was a pig being killed."</p><p>"That was good hunting," exclaimed the Prince, immediately turning
Coalblack and coming back to the corner of the house.  "Eustace," he
said, "of your courtesy, take Coalblack's head."  Then he dismounted,
and all three gazed in silence while Puddleglum pulled his catch out
into the light.  It was a most miserable little gnome, only about three
feet long.  It had a sort of ridge, like a cock's comb (only hard), on
the top of its head, little pink eyes, and a mouth and chin so large
and round that its face looked like that of a pigmy hippopotamus.  If
they had not been in such a tight place, they would have burst into
laughter at the sight of it.</p><p>"Now, Earthman," said the Prince, standing over it and holding his
sword point very near the prisoner's neck, "speak up, like an honest
gnome, and you shall go free.  Play the knave with us, and you are but
a dead Earthman.  Good Puddleglum, how can it speak while you hold its
mouth tight shut?"</p><p>"No, and it can't bite either," said Puddleglum.  "If I had the silly
soft hands that you humans have (saving your Highness's reverence) I'd
have been all over blood by now.  Yet even a Marsh–wiggle gets tired of
being chewed."</p><p>"Sirrah," said the Prince to the gnome, "one bite and you die.  Let its
mouth open, Puddleglum."</p><p>"Oo–ee–ee," squealed the Earthman, "Let me go, let me go.  It isn't me.
I didn't do it."</p><p>"Didn't do what?" asked Puddleglum.</p><p>"Whatever your Honours say I <span class="emphasis"><em>did</em></span> do," answered the creature.</p><p>"Tell me your name," said the Prince, "and what you Earthmen are all
about to–day."</p><p>"Oh please, your Honours, please, kind gentlemen," whimpered the gnome.
"Promise you will not tell the Queen's grace anything I say."</p><p>"The Queen's grace, as you call her," said the Prince sternly, "is
dead.  I killed her myself."</p><p>"What!" cried the gnome, opening its ridiculous mouth wider and wider
in astonishment.  "Dead?  The Witch dead?  And by your Honour's hand?"
It gave a huge sigh of relief and added, "Why then your Honour is a
friend!"</p><p>The Prince withdrew his sword an inch or so.  Puddleglum let the
creature sit up.  It looked round on the four travellers with its
twinkling, red eyes, chuckled once or twice, and began.</p></section><footer/></body></html>