<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XIV</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch13.xhtml" title="Chapter XIII"/><link rel="next" href="ch15.xhtml" title="Chapter XV"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter XIV" epub:type="chapter" id="id70364673953740"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter XIV</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Bottom of the World</em></h3></div></div></div><p>"My name is Golg," said the gnome.  "And I'll tell your Honours all I
know.  About an hour ago we were all going about our work—<span class="emphasis"><em>her</em></span> work,
I should say—sad and silent, same as we've done any other day for
years and years.  Then there came a great crash and bang.  As soon as
they heard it, everyone says to himself, I haven't had a song or a
dance or let off a squib for a long time; why's that?  And everyone
thinks to himself, Why, I must have been enchanted.  And then everyone
says to himself, I'm blessed if I know why I'm carrying this load, and
I'm not going to carry it any further: that's that.  And down we all
throw our sacks and bundles and tools.  Then everyone turns and sees
the great red glow over yonder.  And everyone says to himself, What's
that?  And everyone answers himself and says, There's a crack or chasm
split open and a nice warm glow coming up through it from the Really
Deep Land, a thousand fathom under us."</p><p>"Great Scott," exclaimed Eustace, "are there other lands still lower
down?"</p><p>"Oh yes, your Honour," said Golg.  "Lovely places; what we call the
Land of Bism.  This country where we are now, the Witch's country, is
what we call the Shallow Lands.  It's a good deal too near the surface
to suit us.  Ugh!  You might almost as well be living outside, on the
surface itself.  You see, we're all poor gnomes from Bism whom the
Witch has called up here by magic to work for her.  But we'd forgotten
all about it till that crash came and the spell broke.  We didn't know
who we were or where we belonged.  We couldn't do anything, or think
anything, except what she put into our heads.  And it was glum and
gloomy things she put there all those years.  I've nearly forgotten how
to make a joke or dance a jig.  But the moment the bang came and the
chasm opened and the sea began rising, it all came back.  And of course
we all set off as quick as we could to get down the crack and home to
our own place.  And you can see them over there all letting off rockets
and standing on their heads for joy.  And I'll be very obliged to your
Honours if you'll soon let me go and join in."</p><p>"I think this is simply splendid," said Jill.  "I'm so glad we freed
the gnomes as well as ourselves when we cut off the Witch's head!  And
I'm so glad they aren't really horrid and gloomy any more than the
Prince really was—well, what he seemed like."</p><p>"That's all very well, Pole," said Puddleglum cautiously.  "But those
gnomes didn't look to me like chaps who were just running away.  It
looked more like military formations, if you ask me.  Do you look me in
the face, Mr. Golg, and tell me you weren't preparing for battle?"</p><p>"Of course we were, your Honour," said Golg.  "You see, we didn't know
the Witch was dead.  We thought she'd be watching from the castle.  We
were trying to slip away without being seen.  And then when you four
came out with swords and horses, of course everyone says to himself,
Here it comes: not knowing that his Honour wasn't on the Witch's side.
And we were determined to fight like anything rather than give up the
hope of going back to Bism."</p><p>"I'll be sworn 'tis an honest gnome," said the Prince.  "Let go of it,
friend Puddleglum.  As for me, good Golg, I have been enchanted like
you and your fellows, and have but newly remembered myself.  And now,
one question more.  Do you know the way to those new diggings, by which
the sorceress meant to lead out an army against Overland?"</p><p>"Ee–ee–ee!" squeaked Golg.  "Yes, I know that terrible road.  I will
show you where it begins.  But it is no manner of use your Honour
asking me to go with you on it.  I'll die rather."</p><p>"Why?" asked Eustace anxiously.  "What's so dreadful about it?"</p><p>"Too near the top, the outside," said Golg, shuddering.  "That was the
worst thing the Witch did to us.  We were going to be led out into the
open—onto the outside of the world.  They say there's no roof at all
there; only a horrible great emptiness called the sky.  And the
diggings have gone so far that a few strokes of the pick would bring
you out to it.  I wouldn't dare go near them."</p><p>"Hurrah!  Now you're talking!" cried Eustace, and Jill said, "But it's
not horrid at all up there.  We like it.  We live there."</p><p>"I know you Overlanders live there," said Golg.  "But I thought it was
because you couldn't find your way down inside.  You can't really
<span class="emphasis"><em>like</em></span> it―crawling about like flies on the top of the world!"</p><p>"What about showing us the road at once?" said Puddleglum.</p><p>"In a good hour," cried the Prince.  The whole party set out.  The
Prince remounted his charger, Puddleglum climbed up behind Jill, and
Golg led the way.  As he went, he kept shouting out the good news that
the Witch was dead and that the four Overlanders were not dangerous.
And those who heard him shouted it on to others, so that in a few
minutes the whole of Underland was ringing with shouts and cheers, and
gnomes by hundreds and thousands, leaping, turning cart–wheels,
standing on their heads, playing leap–frog, and letting off huge
crackers, came pressing round Coalblack and Snowflake.  And the Prince
had to tell the story of his own enchantment and deliverance at least
ten times.</p><p>In this way they came to the edge of the chasm.  It was about a
thousand feet long and perhaps two hundred wide.  They dismounted from
their horses and came to the edge, and looked down into it.  A strong
heat smote up into their faces, mixed with a smell which was quite
unlike any they had ever smelled.  It was rich, sharp, exciting, and
made you sneeze.  The depth of the chasm was so bright that at first it
dazzled their eyes and they could see nothing.  When they got used to
it they thought they could make out a river of fire, and, on the banks
of that river, what seemed to be fields and groves of an unbearable,
hot brilliance—though they were dim compared with the river.  There
were blues, reds, greens, and whites all jumbled together: a very good
stained–glass window with the tropical sun staring straight through it
at midday might have something the same effect.  Down the rugged sides
of the chasm, looking black like flies against all that fiery light,
hundreds of Earthmen were climbing.</p><p>"Your honours," said Golg (and when they turned to look at him they
could see nothing but blackness for a few minutes, their eyes were so
dazzled).  "Your honours, why don't you come down to Bism?  You'd be
happier there than in that cold, unprotected, naked country out on top.
Or at least come down for a short visit."</p><p>Jill took it for granted that none of the others would listen to such
an idea for a moment.  To her horror she heard the Prince saying:</p><p>"Truly, friend Golg, I have half a mind to come down with you.  For
this is a marvellous adventure, and it may be no mortal man has ever
looked into Bism before or will ever have the chance again.  And I know
not how, as the years pass, I shall bear to remember that it was once
in my power to have probed the uttermost pit of Earth and that I
forbore.  But could a man live there?  You do not swim in the
fire–river itself?"</p><p>"Oh no, your Honour.  Not we.  It's only salamanders live in the fire
itself."</p><p>"What kind of beast is your salamander?" asked the Prince.</p><p>"It is hard to tell their kind, your Honour," said Golg.  "For they are
too white–hot to look at.  But they are most like small dragons.  They
speak to us out of the fire.  They are wonderfully clever with their
tongues: very witty and eloquent."</p><p>Jill glanced hastily at Eustace.  She had felt sure that he would like
the idea of climbing down that chasm even less than she did.  Her heart
sank as she saw that his face was quite changed.  He looked much more
like the Prince than like the old Scrubb at Experiment House.  For all
his adventures, and the days when he had sailed with King Caspian, were
coming back to him.</p><p>"Your Highness," he said.  "If my old friend Reepicheep the Mouse were
here, he would say we could not now refuse the adventures of Bism
without a great impeachment to our honour."</p><p>"Down there," said Golg, "I could show you real gold, real silver, real
diamonds."</p><p>"Bosh!" said Jill rudely.  "As if we didn't know that we're below the
deepest mines even here."</p><p>"Yes," said Golg.  "I have heard of those little scratches in the crust
that you Topdwellers call mines.  But that's where you get dead gold,
dead silver, dead gems.  Down in Bism we have them alive and growing.
There I'll pick you bunches of rubies that you can eat and squeeze you
a cup full of diamond–juice.  You won't care much about fingering the
cold, dead treasures of your shallow mines after you have tasted the
live ones of Bism."</p><p>"My father went to the world's end," said Rilian thoughtfully.  "It
would be a marvellous thing if his son went to the bottom of the world."</p><p>"If your Highness wants to see your father while he's still alive,
which I think he'd prefer," said Puddleglum, "it's about time we were
getting onto that road to the diggings."</p><p>"And I won't go down that hole, whatever anyone says," added Jill.</p><p>"Why, if your Honours are really set to go back to Overworld," said
Golg, "there <span class="emphasis"><em>is</em></span> one bit of the road that's rather lower than this.
And perhaps, if that flood's still rising―"</p><p>"Oh, do, do, do come on!" begged Jill.</p><p>"I fear it must be so," said the Prince with a deep sigh.  "But I have
left half of my heart in the land of Bism."</p><p>"Please!" begged Jill.</p><p>"Where is the road?" asked Puddleglum.</p><p>"There are lamps all the way," said Golg.  "Your Honour can see the
beginning of the road on the far side of the chasm."</p><p>"How long will the lamps burn for?" asked Puddleglum.</p><p>At that moment a hissing, scorching voice like the voice of Fire itself
(they wondered afterwards if it could have been a salamander's) came
whistling up out of the very depths of Bism.</p><p>"Quick!  Quick!  Quick!  To the cliffs, to the cliffs, to the cliffs!"
it said.  "The rift closes.  It closes.  It closes.  Quick!  Quick."
And at the same time, with ear–shattering cracks and creaks, the rocks
moved.  Already, while they looked, the chasm was narrower.  From every
side belated gnomes were rushing into it.  They would not wait to climb
down the rocks.  They flung themselves headlong and, either because so
strong a blast of hot air was beating up from the bottom, or for some
other reason, they could be seen floating downwards like leaves.
Thicker and thicker they floated, till their blackness almost blotted
out the fiery river and the groves of live gems.  "Good–bye to your
Honours.  I'm off," shouted Golg, and dived.  Only a few were left to
follow him.  The chasm was now no broader than a stream.  Now it was
narrow as the slit in a pillar–box.  Now it was only an intensely
bright thread.  Then, with a shock like a thousand goods trains
crashing into a thousand pairs of buffers, the lips of rock closed.
The hot, maddening smell vanished.  The travellers were alone in an
Underworld which now looked far blacker than before.  Pale, dim, and
dreary, the lamps marked the direction of the road.</p><p>"Now," said Puddleglum, "it's ten to one we've already stayed too long,
but we may as well make a try.  Those lamps will give out in five
minutes, I shouldn't wonder."</p><p>They urged the horses to a canter and thundered along the dusky road in
fine style.  But almost at once it began going downhill.  They would
have thought Golg had sent them the wrong way if they had not seen, on
the other side of the valley, the lamps going on and upwards as far as
the eye could reach.  But at the bottom of the valley the lamps shone
on moving water.</p><p>"Haste," cried the Prince.  They galloped down the slope.  It would
have been nasty enough at the bottom even five minutes later for the
tide was running up the valley like a mill–race, and if it had come to
swimming, the horses could hardly have won over.  But it was still only
a foot or two deep, and though it swished terribly round the horses'
legs, they reached the far side in safety.</p><p>Then began the slow, weary march uphill with nothing ahead to look at
but the pale lamps which went up and up as far as the eye could reach.
When they looked back they could see the water spreading.  All the
hills of Underland were now islands, and it was only on those islands
that the lamps remained.  Every moment some distant light vanished.
Soon there would be total darkness everywhere except on the road they
were following; and even on the lower part of it behind them, though no
lamps had yet gone out, the lamplight shone on water.</p><p>Although they had good reason for hurrying, the horses could not go on
for ever without a rest.  They halted: and in silence they could hear
the lapping of water.</p><p>"I wonder is what's his name—Father Time—flooded out now," said Jill.
"And all those queer sleeping animals."</p><p>"I don't think we're as high as that," said Eustace.  "Don't you
remember how we had to go downhill to reach the sunless sea?  I
shouldn't think the water has reached Father Time's cave yet."</p><p>"That's as may be," said Puddleglum.  "I'm more interested in the lamps
on this road.  Look a bit sickly, don't they?"</p><p>"They always did," said Jill.</p><p>"Ah," said Puddleglum.  "But they're greener now."</p><p>"You don't mean to say you think they're going out?" cried Eustace.</p><p>"Well, however they work, you can't expect them to last for ever, you
know," replied the Marsh–wiggle.  "But don't let your spirits down,
Scrubb.  I've got my eye on the water too, and I don't think it's
rising so fast as it did."</p><p>"Small comfort, friend," said the Prince.  "If we cannot find our way
out.  I cry you mercy, all.  I am to blame for my pride and fantasy
which delayed us by the mouth of the land of Bism.  Now, let us ride
on."</p><p>During the hour or so that followed Jill sometimes thought that
Puddleglum was right about the lamps, and sometimes thought it was only
her imagination.  Meanwhile the land was changing.  The roof of
Underland was so near that even by that dull light they could now see
it quite distinctly.  And the great, rugged walls of Underland could be
seen drawing closer on each side.  The road, in fact, was leading them
up into a steep tunnel.  They began to pass picks and shovels and
barrows and other signs that the diggers had recently been at work.  If
only one could be sure of getting out, all this was very cheering.  But
the thought of going on into a hole that would get narrower and
narrower, and harder to turn back in, was very unpleasant.</p><p>At last the roof was so low that Puddleglum and the Prince knocked
their heads against it.  The party dismounted and led the horses.  The
road was uneven here and one had to pick one's steps with some care.
That was how Jill noticed the growing darkness.  There was no doubt
about it now.  The faces of the others looked strange and ghastly in
the green glow.  Then all at once (she couldn't help it) Jill gave a
little scream.  One light, the next one ahead, went out altogether.
The one behind them did the same.  Then they were in absolute darkness.</p><p>"Courage, friends," came Prince Rilian's voice.  "Whether we live or
die Aslan will be our good lord."</p><p>"That's right, Sir," said Puddleglum's voice.  "And you must always
remember there's one good thing about being trapped down here: it'll
save funeral expenses."</p><p>Jill held her tongue.  (If you don't want other people to know how
frightened you are, this is always a wise thing to do; it's your voice
that gives you away.)</p><p>"We might as well go on as stand here," said Eustace; and when she
heard the tremble in <span class="emphasis"><em>his</em></span> voice, Jill knew how wise she'd been not to
trust her own.</p><p>Puddleglum and Eustace went first with their arms stretched out in
front of them, for fear of blundering into anything; Jill and the
Prince followed, leading the horses.</p><p>"I say," came Eustace's voice much later, "are my eyes going queer or
is there a patch of light up there?"</p><p>Before anyone could answer him, Puddleglum called out: "Stop.  I'm up
against a dead end.  And it's earth, not rock.  What were you saying,
Scrubb?"</p><p>"By the Lion," said the Prince, "Eustace is right.  There is a sort
of―"</p><p>"But it's not daylight," said Jill.  "It's only a cold blue sort of
light."</p><p>"Better than nothing, though," said Eustace.  "Can we get up to it?"</p><p>"It's not right overhead," said Puddleglum.  "It's above us, but it's
in this wall that I've run into.  How would it be, Pole, if you got on
my shoulders and saw whether you could get up to it?"</p></section><footer/></body></html>