<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XV</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch14.xhtml" title="Chapter XIV"/><link rel="next" href="ch16.xhtml" title="Chapter XVI"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter XV" epub:type="chapter" id="id70364673936180"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter XV</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Disappearance of Jill</em></h3></div></div></div><p>The patch of light did not show up anything down in the darkness where
they were standing.  The others could only hear, not see, Jill's
efforts to get onto the Marsh–wiggle's back.  That is, they heard him
saying, "You needn't put your finger in my eye," and, "Nor your foot in
my mouth either," and, "That's more like it," and, "Now, I'll hold on
to your legs.  That'll leave your arms free to steady yourself against
the earth."</p><p>Then they looked up and soon they saw the black shape of Jill's head
against the patch of light.</p><p>"Well?" they all shouted up anxiously.</p><p>"It's a hole," called Jill's voice.  "I could get through it if I was a
little bit higher."</p><p>"What do you see through it?" asked Eustace.</p><p>"Nothing much yet," said Jill.  "I say, Puddleglum, let go my legs so
that I can stand on your shoulders instead of sitting on them.  I can
steady myself all right against the edge."</p><p>They could hear her moving and then much more of her came into sight
against the greyness of the opening; in fact all of her down to the
waist.</p><p>"I say―" began Jill, but suddenly broke off with a cry: not a sharp
cry.  It sounded more as if her mouth had been muffled up or had
something pushed into it.</p><p>After that she found her voice and seemed to be shouting out as loud as
she could, but they couldn't hear the words.  Two things then happened
at the same moment.  The patch of light was completely blocked up for a
second or so; and they heard both a scuffling, struggling sound and the
voice of the Marsh–wiggle gasping: "Quick!  Help.  Hold onto her legs.
Someone's pulling her.  There!  No, here.  Too late!"</p><p>The opening, and the cold light which filled it, were now perfectly
clear again.  Jill had vanished.</p><p>"Jill!  Jill!" they shouted frantically, but there was no answer.</p><p>"Why the dickens couldn't you have held her feet?" said Eustace.</p><p>"I don't know, Scrubb," groaned Puddleglum.  "Born to be a misfit, I
shouldn't wonder.  Fated.  Fated to be Pole's death, just as I was
fated to eat Talking Stag at Harfang.  Not that it isn't my own fault
as well, of course."</p><p>"This is the greatest shame and sorrow that could have fallen on us,"
said the Prince.  "We have sent a brave lady into the hands of enemies
and stayed behind in safety."</p><p>"Don't paint it <span class="emphasis"><em>too</em></span> black, Sir," said Puddleglum.  "We're not very
safe except for death by starvation in this hole."</p><p>"I wonder am <span class="emphasis"><em>I</em></span> small enough to get through where Jill did?" said
Eustace.</p><p>What had really happened to Jill was this.  As soon as she got her head
out of the hole she found that she was looking down as if from an
upstairs window, not up as if through a trap–door.  She had been so
long in the dark that her eyes couldn't at first take in what they were
seeing: except that she was not looking at the daylit, sunny world
which she so wanted to see.  The air seemed to be deadly cold, and the
light was pale and blue.  There was also a good deal of noise going on
and a lot of white objects flying about in the air.  It was at that
moment that she had shouted down to Puddleglum to let her stand up on
his shoulders.</p><p>When she had done this, she could see and hear a good deal better.  The
noises she had been hearing turned out to be of two kinds: the
rhythmical thump of several feet, and the music of four fiddles, three
flutes, and a drum.  She also got her own position clear.  She was
looking out of a hole in a steep bank which sloped down and reached the
level about fourteen feet below her.  Everything was very white.  A lot
of people were moving about.  Then she gasped!  The people were trim
little Fauns, and Dryads with leaf–crowned hair floating behind them.
For a second they looked as if they were moving anyhow; then she saw
that they were really doing a dance—a dance with so many complicated
steps and figures that it took you some time to understand it.  Then it
came over her like a thunderclap that the pale, blue light was really
moonlight, and the white stuff on the ground was really snow.  And of
course!  There were the stars staring in a black frosty sky overhead.
And the tall black things behind the dancers were trees.  They had not
only got out into the upper world at last, but had come out in the
heart of Narnia.  Jill felt she could have fainted with delight; and
the music—the wild music, intensely sweet and yet just the least bit
eerie too, and full of good magic as the Witch's thrumming had been
full of bad magic—made her feel it all the more.</p><p>All this takes a long time to tell, but of course it took a very short
time to see.  Jill turned almost at once to shout down to the others,
"I say!  It's all right.  We're out, and we're home."  But the reason
she never got further than "I say" was this.  Circling round and round
the dancers was a ring of Dwarfs, all dressed in their finest clothes;
mostly scarlet with fur–lined hoods and golden tassels and big furry
top–boots.  As they circled round they were all diligently throwing
snowballs.  (Those were the white things that Jill had seen flying
through the air.)  They weren't throwing them at the dancers as silly
boys might have been doing in England.  They were throwing them through
the dance in such perfect time with the music and with such perfect aim
that if all the dancers were in exactly the right places at exactly the
right moments, no–one would be hit.  This is called the Great Snow
Dance and it is done every year in Narnia on the first moonlit night
when there is snow on the ground.  Of course it is a kind of game as
well as a dance, because every now and then some dancer will be the
least little bit wrong and get a snowball in the face, and then
everyone laughs.  But a good team of dancers, Dwarfs, and musicians
will keep it up for hours without a single hit.  On fine nights when
the cold and the drum–taps, and the hooting of the owls, and the
moonlight, have got into their wild, woodland blood and made it even
wilder, they will dance till daybreak.  I wish you could see it for
yourselves.</p><p>What had stopped Jill when she got as far as the say of "I say" was of
course simply a fine big snowball that came sailing through the dance
from a Dwarf on the far side and got her fair and square in the mouth.
She didn't in the least mind; twenty snowballs would not have damped
her spirits at that moment.  But however happy you are feeling, you
can't talk with your mouth full of snow.  And when, after considerable
spluttering, she could speak again, she quite forgot in her excitement
that the others, down in the dark, behind her, still didn't know the
good news.  She simply leaned as far out of the hole as she could, and
yelled to the dancers.</p><p>"Help!  Help!  We're buried in the hill.  Come and dig us out."</p><p>The Narnians, who had not even noticed the little hole in the hillside,
were of course very surprised, and looked about in several wrong
directions before they found out where the voice was coming from.  But
when they caught sight of Jill they all came running towards her, and
as many as could scrambled up the bank, and a dozen or more hands were
stretched up to help her.  And Jill caught hold of them and thus got
out of the hole and came slithering down the bank head first, and then
picked herself up and said:</p><p>"Oh, do go and dig the others out.  There are three others, besides the
horses.  And one of them is Prince Rilian."</p><p>She was already in the middle of a crowd when she said this, for
besides the dancers all sorts of people who had been watching the
dance, and whom she had not seen at first, came running up.  Squirrels
came out of the trees in showers, and so did Owls.  Hedgehogs came
waddling as fast as their short legs would carry them.  Bears and
Badgers followed at a slower pace.  A great Panther, twitching its tail
with excitement, was the last to join the party.</p><p>But as soon as they understood what Jill was saying, they all became
active.  "Pick and shovel, boys, pick and shovel.  Off for our tools!"
said the Dwarfs, and dashed away into the woods at top speed.  "Wake up
some Moles, they're the chaps for digging.  They're quite as good as
Dwarfs," said a voice.  "What was that she said about Prince Rilian?"
said another.  "Hush!" said the Panther.  "The poor child's crazed, and
no wonder after being lost inside the hill.  She doesn't know what
she's saying."  "That's right," said an old Bear.  "Why, she said
Prince Rilian was a horse!"—"No, she didn't," said a Squirrel, very
pert.  "Yes, she did," said another Squirrel, even perter.</p><p>"It's quite t–t–t–true.  D–d–don't be so silly," said Jill.  She spoke
like that because her teeth were now chattering with the cold.</p><p>Immediately one of the Dryads flung round her a furry cloak which some
Dwarf had dropped when he rushed to fetch his mining tools, and an
obliging Faun trotted off among the trees to a place where Jill could
see firelight in the mouth of a cave, to get her a hot drink.  But
before it came, all the Dwarfs reappeared with spades and pick–axes and
charged at the hillside.  Then Jill heard cries of "Hi!  What are you
doing?  Put that sword down," and "Now, young 'un: none of that," and,
"He's a vicious one, now, isn't he?"  Jill hurried to the spot and
didn't know whether to laugh or cry when she saw Eustace's face, very
pale and dirty, projecting from the blackness of the hole, and
Eustace's right hand brandishing a sword with which he made lunges at
anyone who came near him.</p><p>For of course Eustace had been having a very different time from Jill
during the last few minutes.  He had heard Jill cry out and seen her
disappear into the unknown.  Like the Prince and Puddleglum, he thought
that some enemies had caught her.  And from down below he didn't see
that the pale, blueish light was moonlight.  He thought the hole would
lead only into some other cave, lit by some ghostly phosphorescence and
filled with goodness–knows–what evil creatures of the Underworld.  So
that when he had persuaded Puddleglum to give him a back, and drawn his
sword, and poked out his head, he had really been doing a very brave
thing.  The others would have done it first if they could, but the hole
was too small for them to climb through.  Eustace was a little bigger,
and a lot clumsier, than Jill, so that when he looked out he bumped his
head against the top of the hole and brought a small avalanche of snow
down on his face.  And so, when he could see again, and saw dozens of
figures coming at him as hard as they could run, it is not surprising
that he tried to ward them off.</p><p>"Stop, Eustace, stop," cried Jill.  "They're all friends.  Can't you
see?  We've come up in Narnia.  Everything's all right."</p><p>Then Eustace did see, and apologised to the Dwarfs (and the Dwarfs said
not to mention it), and dozens of thick, hairy, dwarfish hands helped
him out just as they had helped Jill out a few minutes before.  Then
Jill scrambled up the bank and put her head in at the dark opening and
shouted the good news in to the prisoners.  As she turned away she
heard Puddleglum mutter, "Ah, poor Pole.  It's been too much for her,
this last bit.  Turned her head, I shouldn't wonder.  She's beginning
to see things."</p><p>Jill rejoined Eustace and they shook one another by both hands and took
in great deep breaths of the free midnight air.  And a warm cloak was
brought for Eustace and hot drinks for both.  While they were sipping
it, the Dwarfs had already got all the snow and all the sods off a
large strip of the hillside round the original hole, and the pickaxes
and spades were now going as merrily as the feet of Fauns and Dryads
had been going in the dance ten minutes before.  Only ten minutes!  Yet
already it felt to Jill and Eustace as if all their dangers in the dark
and heat and general smotheriness of the earth must have been only a
dream.  Out here, in the cold, with the moon and the huge stars
overhead (Narnian stars are nearer than stars in our world) and with
kind, merry faces all round them, one couldn't quite believe in
Underland.</p><p>Before they had finished their hot drinks, a dozen or so Moles, newly
waked and still very sleepy, and not well pleased, had arrived.  But as
soon as they understood what it was all about, they joined in with a
will.  Even the Fauns made themselves useful by carting away the earth
in little barrows, and the Squirrels danced and leaped to and fro in
great excitement, though Jill never found out exactly what they thought
they were doing.  The Bears and Owls contented themselves with giving
advice, and kept on asking the children if they wouldn't like to come
into the cave (that was where Jill had seen the firelight) and get warm
and have supper.  But the children couldn't bear to go without seeing
their friends set free.</p><p>No one in our world can work at a job of that sort as Dwarfs and
Talking Moles work in Narnia; but then, of course, Moles and Dwarfs
don't look on it as work.  They like digging.  It was therefore not
really long before they had opened a great black chasm in the hillside.
And out from the blackness into the moonlight—this would have been
rather dreadful if one hadn't known who they were—came, first, the
long, leggy, steeple–hatted figure of the Marsh–wiggle, and then,
leading two great horses, Rilian the Prince himself.</p><p>As Puddleglum appeared shouts broke out on every side: "Why, it's a
Wiggle—why, it's old Puddleglum—old Puddleglum from the Eastern
Marshes—what ever have you been doing, Puddleglum?—there've been
search–parties out for you—the Lord Trumpkin has been putting up
notices—there's a reward offered!"  But all this died away, all in one
moment, into dead silence, as quickly as the noise dies away in a rowdy
dormitory if the Headmaster opens the door.  For now they saw the
Prince.</p><p>No one doubted for a moment who he was.  There were plenty of Beasts
and Dryads and Dwarfs and Fauns who remembered him from the days before
his enchanting.  There were some old ones who could just remember how
his father, King Caspian, had looked when he was a young man, and saw
the likeness.  But I think they would have known him anyway.  Pale
though he was from long imprisonment in the Deep Lands, dressed in
black, dusty, dishevelled, and weary, there was something in his face
and air which no one could mistake.  That look is in the face of all
true kings of Narnia, who rule by the will of Aslan and sit at Cair
Paravel on the throne of Peter the High King.  Instantly every head was
bared and every knee was bent; a moment later such cheering and
shouting, such jumps and reels of joy, such hand–shakings and kissings
and embracings of everybody by everybody else broke out that the tears
came into Jill's eyes.  Their quest had been worth all the pains it
cost.</p><p>"Please it your Highness," said the oldest of the Dwarfs, "there is
some attempt at a supper in the cave yonder, prepared against the
ending of the snow–dance―"</p><p>"With a good will, Father," said the Prince.  "For never had any
Prince, Knight, Gentleman, or Bear so good a stomach to his victuals as
we four wanderers have to–night."</p><p>The whole crowd began to move away through the trees towards the cave.
Jill heard Puddleglum saying to those who pressed round him.  "No, no,
my story can wait.  Nothing worth talking about has happened to me.  I
want to hear the news.  Don't try breaking it to me gently, for I'd
rather have it all at once.  Has the King been shipwrecked?  Any forest
fires?  No wars on the Calormen border?  Or a few dragons, I shouldn't
wonder?"  And all the creatures laughed aloud and said, "Isn't that
just like a Marsh–wiggle?"</p><p>The two children were nearly dropping with tiredness and hunger, but
the warmth of the cave, and the very sight of it, with the firelight
dancing on the walls and dressers and cups and saucers and plates and
on the smooth stone floor, just as it does in a farmhouse kitchen,
revived them a little.  All the same they went fast asleep while supper
was being got ready.  And while they slept Prince Rilian was talking
over the whole adventure with the older and wiser Beasts and Dwarfs.
And now they all saw what it meant; how a wicked Witch (doubtless the
same kind as that White Witch who had brought the Great Winter on
Narnia long ago) had contrived the whole thing, first killing Rilian's
mother and enchanting Rilian himself.  And they saw how she had dug
right under Narnia and was going to break out and rule it through
Rilian: and how he had never dreamed that the country of which she
would make him king (king in name, but really her slave) was his own
country.  And from the children's part of the story they saw how she
was in league and friendship with the dangerous giants of Harfang.
"And the lesson of it all is, your Highness," said the oldest Dwarf,
"that those Northern Witches always mean the same thing, but in every
age they have a different plan for getting it."</p></section><footer/></body></html>