<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XVI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch15.xhtml" title="Chapter XV"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter XVI" epub:type="chapter" id="id70364673985860"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter XVI</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Healing of Harms</em></h3></div></div></div><p>When Jill woke next morning and found herself in a cave, she thought
for one horrid moment that she was back in the Underworld.  But when
she noticed that she was lying on a bed of heather with a furry mantle
over her, and saw a cheery fire crackling (as if newly lit) on a stone
hearth and, further off, morning sunlight coming in through the cave's
mouth, she remembered all the happy truth.  They had had a delightful
supper, all crowded into that cave, in spite of being so sleepy before
it was properly over.  She had a vague impression of Dwarfs crowding
round the fire with frying–pans rather bigger than themselves, and the
hissing, and delicious smell of sausages, and more, and more, and more
sausages.  And not wretched sausages half full of bread and soya bean
either, but real meaty, spicy ones, fat and piping hot and burst and
just the tiniest bit burnt.  And great mugs of frothy chocolate, and
roast potatoes and roast chestnuts, and baked apples with raisins stuck
in where the cores had been, and then ices just to freshen you up after
all the hot things.</p><p>Jill sat up and looked around.  Puddleglum and Eustace were lying not
far away, both fast asleep.</p><p>"Hi, you two!" shouted Jill in a loud voice.  "Aren't you ever going to
get up?"</p><p>"Shoo, shoo!" said a sleepy voice somewhere above her.  "Time to be
settling down.  Have a good snooze, do, do.  Don't make a to–do.
Tu–whoo!"</p><p>"Why, I do believe," said Jill, glancing up at a white bundle of fluffy
feathers which was perched on top of a grandfather clock in one corner
of the cave, "I do believe it's Glimfeather!"</p><p>"True, true," whirred the Owl, lifting its head out from under its wing
and opening one eye.  "I came up with a message for the Prince at about
two.  The squirrels brought us the good news.  Message for the Prince.
He's gone.  You're to follow too.  Good–day―" and the head
disappeared again.</p><p>As there seemed no further hope of getting any information from the
Owl, Jill got up and began looking round for any chance of a wash and
some breakfast.  But almost at once a little Faun came trotting into
the cave with a sharp click–clack of his goaty hoofs on the stone floor.</p><p>"Ah!  You've woken up at last, Daughter of Eve," he said.  "Perhaps
you'd better wake the Son of Adam.  You've got to be off in a few
minutes and two Centaurs have very kindly offered to let you ride on
their backs down to Cair Paravel."  He added in a lower voice.  "Of
course, you realise it is a most special and unheard–of honour to be
allowed to ride a Centaur.  I don't know that I ever heard of anyone
doing it before.  It wouldn't do to keep them waiting."</p><p>"Where's the Prince?" was the first question of Eustace and Puddleglum
as soon as they had been waked.</p><p>"He's gone down to meet the King, his father, at Cair Paravel,"
answered the Faun, whose name was Orruns.  "His Majesty's ship is
expected in harbour any moment.  It seems that the King met Aslan—I
don't know whether it was in a vision or face to face—before he had
sailed far, and Aslan turned him back and told him he would find his
long–lost son awaiting him when he reached Narnia."</p><p>Eustace was now up and he and Jill set about helping Orruns to get the
breakfast.  Puddleglum was told to stay in bed.  A Centaur called
Cloudbirth, a famous healer, or (as Orruns called it) a "leach", was
coming to see to his burnt foot.</p><p>"Ah!" said Puddleglum in a tone almost of contentment, "he'll want to
have the leg off at the knee, I shouldn't wonder.  You see if he
doesn't."  But he was quite glad to stay in bed.</p><p>Breakfast was scrambled eggs and toast and Eustace tackled it just as
if he had not had a very large supper in the middle of the night.</p><p>"I say, Son of Adam," said the Faun, looking with a certain awe at
Eustace's mouthfuls.  "There's no need to hurry <span class="emphasis"><em>quite</em></span> so dreadfully
as that.  I don't think the Centaurs have quite finished <span class="emphasis"><em>their</em></span>
breakfasts yet."</p><p>"Then they must have got up very late," said Eustace.  "I bet it's
after ten o'clock."</p><p>"Oh no," said Orruns.  "They got up before it was light."</p><p>"Then they must have waited the dickens of a time for breakfast," said
Eustace.</p><p>"No, they didn't," said Orruns.  "They began eating the minute they
woke."</p><p>"Golly!" said Eustace.  "Do they eat a very big breakfast?"</p><p>"Why, Son of Adam, don't you understand?  A Centaur has a man–stomach
and a horse–stomach.  And of course both want breakfast.  So first of
all he has porridge and pavenders and kidneys and bacon and omelette
and cold ham and toast and marmalade and coffee and beer.  And after
that he attends to the horse part of himself by grazing for an hour or
so and finishing up with a hot mash, some oats and a bag of sugar.
That's why it's such a serious thing to ask a Centaur to stay for the
week–end.  A very serious thing indeed."</p><p>At that moment there was a sound of horse–hoofs tapping on rock from
the mouth of the cave, and the children looked up.  The two Centaurs,
one with a black and one with a golden beard flowing over their
magnificent bare chests, stood waiting for them, bending their heads a
little so as to look into the cave.  Then the children became very
polite and finished their breakfast very quickly.  No one thinks a
Centaur funny when he sees it.  They are solemn, majestic people, full
of ancient wisdom which they learn from the stars, not easily made
either merry or angry; but their anger is terrible as a tidal wave when
it comes.</p><p>"Good–bye, dear Puddleglum," said Jill, going over to the
Marsh–wiggle's bed.  "I'm sorry we called you a wet blanket."</p><p>"So'm I," said Eustace.  "You've been the best friend in the world."</p><p>"And I do hope we'll meet again," added Jill.</p><p>"Not much chance of that, I should say," replied Puddleglum.  "I don't
reckon I'm very likely to see my old wigwam again either.  And that
Prince—he's a nice chap—but do you think he's very strong?
Constitution ruined with living underground, I shouldn't wonder.  Looks
the sort that might go off any day."</p><p>"Puddleglum!" said Jill.  "You're a regular old humbug.  You sound as
doleful as a funeral and I believe you're perfectly happy.  And you
talk as if you were afraid of everything, when you're really as brave
as—as a lion."</p><p>"Now, speaking of funerals," began Puddleglum, but Jill, who heard the
Centaurs tapping with their hoofs behind her, surprised him very much
by flinging her arms round his thin neck and kissing his muddy–looking
face, while Eustace wrung his hand.  Then they both rushed away to the
Centaurs, and the Marsh–wiggle, sinking back on his bed, remarked to
himself, "Well, I wouldn't have dreamt of her doing that.  Even though
I am a good–looking chap."</p><p>To ride on a Centaur is, no doubt, a great honour (and except Jill and
Eustace there is probably no–one alive in the world to–day who has had
it) but it is very uncomfortable.  For no–one who valued his life would
suggest putting a saddle on a Centaur, and riding bare–back is no fun;
especially if, like Eustace, you have never learned to ride at all.
The Centaurs were very polite in a grave, gracious, grown–up kind of
way, and as they cantered through the Narnian woods they spoke, without
turning their heads, telling the children about the properties of herbs
and roots, the influences of the planets, the nine names of Aslan with
their meanings, and things of that sort.  But however sore and jolted
the two humans were, they would now give anything to have that journey
over again: to see those glades and slopes sparkling with last night's
snow, to be met by rabbits and squirrels and birds that wished you good
morning, to breathe again the air of Narnia and hear the voices of the
Narnian trees.</p><p>They came down to the river, flowing bright and blue in winter
sunshine, far below the last bridge (which is at the snug, red–roofed
little town of Beruna) and were ferried across in a flat barge by the
ferryman; or rather, by the ferry–wiggle, for it is Marsh–wiggles who
do most of the watery and fishy kinds of work in Narnia.  And when they
had crossed they rode along the south bank of the river and presently
came to Cair Paravel itself.  And at the very moment of their arrival
they saw that same bright ship which they had seen when they first set
foot in Narnia, gliding up the river like a huge bird.  All the court
were once more assembled on the green between the castle and the quay
to welcome King Caspian home again.  Rilian, who had changed his black
clothes and was now dressed in a scarlet cloak over silver mail, stood
close to the water's edge, bare–headed, to receive his father; and the
Dwarf Trumpkin sat beside him in his little donkey–chair.  The children
saw there would be no chance of reaching the Prince through all that
crowd, and, anyway, they now felt rather shy.  So they asked the
Centaurs if they might go on sitting on their backs a little longer and
thus see everything over the heads of the courtiers.  And the Centaurs
said they might.</p><p>A flourish of silver trumpets came over the water from the ship's deck:
the sailors threw a rope; rats (Talking Rats, of course) and
Marsh–wiggles made it fast ashore; and the ship was warped in.
Musicians, hidden somewhere in the crowd, began to play solemn,
triumphal music.  And soon the King's galleon was alongside and the
Rats ran the gangway on board her.</p><p>Jill expected to see the old King come down it.  But there appeared to
be some hitch.  A Lord with a pale face came ashore and knelt to the
Prince and to Trumpkin.  The three were talking with their heads close
together for a few minutes, but no–one could hear what they said.  The
music played on, but you could feel that everyone was becoming uneasy.
Then four Knights, carrying something and going very slowly, appeared
on deck.  When they started to come down the gangway you could see what
they were carrying: it was the old King on a bed, very pale and still.
They set him down.  The Prince knelt beside him and embraced him.  They
could see King Caspian raising his hand to bless his son.  And everyone
cheered, but it was a half–hearted cheer, for they all felt that
something was going wrong.  Then suddenly the King's head fell back
upon his pillows, the musicians stopped and there was a dead silence.
The Prince, kneeling by the King's bed, laid down his head upon it and
wept.</p><p>There were whisperings and goings to and fro.  Then Jill noticed that
all who wore hats, bonnets, helmets, or hoods were taking them
off—Eustace included.  Then she heard a rustling and flapping noise up
above the castle; when she looked she saw that the great banner with
the golden Lion on it was being brought down to half–mast.  And after
that, slowly, mercilessly, with wailing strings and disconsolate
blowing of horns, the music began again: this time, a tune to break
your heart.</p><p>They both slipped off their Centaurs (who took no notice of them).</p><p>"I wish I was at home," said Jill.</p><p>Eustace nodded, saying nothing, and bit his lip.</p><p>"I have come," said a deep voice behind them.  They turned and saw the
Lion himself, so bright and real and strong that everything else began
at once to look pale and shadowy compared with him.  And in less time
than it takes to breathe Jill forgot about the dead King of Narnia and
remembered only how she had made Eustace fall over the cliff, and how
she had helped to muff nearly all the signs, and about all the
snappings and quarrellings.  And she wanted to say "I'm sorry" but she
could not speak.  Then the Lion drew them towards him with his eyes,
and bent down and touched their pale faces with his tongue, and said:</p><p>"Think of that no more.  I will not always be scolding.  You have done
the work for which I sent you into Narnia."</p><p>"Please, Aslan," said Jill, "may we go home now?"</p><p>"Yes.  I have come to bring you Home," said Aslan.  Then he opened his
mouth wide and blew.  But this time they had no sense of flying through
the air: instead, it seemed that they remained still, and the wild
breath of Aslan blew away the ship and the dead King and the castle and
the snow and the winter sky.  For all these things floated off into the
air like wreaths of smoke, and suddenly they were standing in a great
brightness of mid–summer sunshine, on smooth turf, among mighty trees,
and beside a fair, fresh stream.  Then they saw that they were once
more on the Mountain of Aslan, high up above and beyond the end of that
world in which Narnia lies.  But the strange thing was that the funeral
music for King Caspian still went on, though no one could tell where it
came from.  They were walking beside the stream and the Lion went
before them: and he became so beautiful, and the music so despairing,
that Jill did not know which of them it was that filled her eyes with
tears.</p><p>Then Aslan stopped, and the children looked into the stream.  And
there, on the golden gravel of the bed of the stream, lay King Caspian,
dead, with the water flowing over him like liquid glass.  His long
white beard swayed in it like water–weed.  And all three stood and
wept.  Even the Lion wept: great Lion–tears, each tear more precious
than the Earth would be if it was a single solid diamond.  And Jill
noticed that Eustace looked neither like a child crying, nor like a boy
crying and wanting to hide it, but like a grown–up crying.  At least,
that is the nearest she could get to it; but really, as she said,
people don't seem to have any particular ages on that mountain.</p><p>"Son of Adam," said Aslan, "go into that thicket and pluck the thorn
that you will find there, and bring it to me."</p><p>Eustace obeyed.  The thorn was a foot long and sharp as a rapier.</p><p>"Drive it into my paw, son of Adam," said Aslan, holding up his right
fore–paw and spreading out the great pad towards Eustace.</p><p>"Must I?" said Eustace.</p><p>"Yes," said Aslan.</p><p>Then Eustace set his teeth and drove the thorn into the Lion's pad.
And there came out a great drop of blood, redder than all redness that
you have ever seen or imagined.  And it splashed into the stream over
the dead body of the King.  At the same moment the doleful music
stopped.  And the dead King began to be changed.  His white beard
turned to grey, and from grey to yellow, and got shorter and vanished
altogether; and his sunken cheeks grew round and fresh, and the
wrinkles were smoothed, and his eyes opened, and his eyes and lips both
laughed, and suddenly he leaped up and stood before them—a very young
man, or a boy.  (But Jill couldn't say which, because of people having
no particular ages in Aslan's country.  Even in this world, of course,
it is the stupidest children who are most childish and the stupidest
grown–ups who are most grown–up.)  And he rushed to Aslan and flung his
arms as far as they would go round the huge neck; and he gave Aslan the
strong kisses of a King, and Aslan gave him the wild kisses of a Lion.</p><p>At last Caspian turned to the others.  He gave a great laugh of
astonished joy.</p><p>"Why!  Eustace!" he said.  "Eustace!  So you did reach the end of the
world after all.  What about my second–best sword that you broke on the
sea–serpent?"</p><p>Eustace made a step towards him with both hands held out, but then drew
back with a somewhat startled expression.</p><p>"Look here!  I say," he stammered.  "It's all very well.  But aren't
you?—I mean didn't you―?"</p><p>"Oh, don't be such an ass," said Caspian.</p><p>"But," said Eustace, looking at Aslan.  "Hasn't he—er—died?"</p><p>"Yes," said the Lion in a very quiet voice, almost (Jill thought) as if
he were laughing.  "He has died.  Most people have, you know.  Even I
have.  There are very few who haven't."</p><p>"Oh," said Caspian.  "I see what's bothering you.  You think I'm a
ghost, or some nonsense.  But don't you see?  I would be that if I
appeared in Narnia now: because I don't belong there any more.  But one
can't be a ghost in one's own country.  I might be a ghost if I got
into your world.  I don't know.  But I suppose it isn't yours either,
now you're here."</p><p>A great hope rose in the children's hearts.  But Aslan shook his shaggy
head.  "No, my dears," he said.  "When you meet me here again, you will
have come to stay.  But not now.  You must go back to your own world
for a while."</p><p>"Sir," said Caspian, "I've always wanted to have just one glimpse of
<span class="emphasis"><em>their</em></span> world.  Is that wrong?"</p><p>"You cannot want wrong things any more, now that you have died, my
son," said Aslan.  "And you shall see their world—for five minutes of
<span class="emphasis"><em>their</em></span> time.  It will take no longer for you to set things right
there."  Then Aslan explained to Caspian what Jill and Eustace were
going back to and all about Experiment House: he seemed to know it
quite as well as they did.</p><p>"Daughter," said Aslan to Jill, "pluck a switch off that bush."  She
did; and as soon as it was in her hand it turned into a fine new riding
crop.</p><p>"Now, sons of Adam, draw your swords," said Aslan.  "But use only the
flat, for it is cowards and children, not warriors, against whom I send
you."</p><p>"Are you coming with us, Aslan?" said Jill.</p><p>"They shall see only my back," said Aslan.</p><p>He led them rapidly through the wood, and before they had gone many
paces, the wall of Experiment House appeared before them.  Then Aslan
roared so that the sun shook in the sky and thirty feet of the wall
fell down before them.  They looked through the gap, down into the
school shrubbery and onto the roof of the gym, all under the same dull
autumn sky which they had seen before their adventures began.  Aslan
turned to Jill and Eustace and breathed upon them and touched their
foreheads with his tongue.  Then he lay down amid the gap he had made
in the wall and turned his golden back to England, and his lordly face
towards his own lands.  At the same moment Jill saw figures whom she
knew only too well running up through the laurels towards them.  Most
of the gang were there—Adela Pennyfather and Cholmondely Major, Edith
Winterblott, "Spotty" Sorner, big Bannister, and the two loathsome
Garrett twins.  But suddenly they stopped.  Their faces changed, and
all the meanness, conceit, cruelty, and sneakishness almost disappeared
in one single expression of terror.  For they saw the wall fallen down,
and a lion as large as a young elephant lying in the gap, and three
figures in glittering clothes with weapons in their hands rushing down
upon them.  For, with the strength of Aslan in them, Jill plied her
crop on the girls and Caspian and Eustace plied the flats of their
swords on the boys so well that in two minutes all the bullies were
running like mad, crying out, "Murder!  Fascists!  Lions!  It isn't
<span class="emphasis"><em>fair</em></span>."  And then the Head (who was, by the way, a woman) came running
out to see what was happening.  And when she saw the lion and the
broken wall and Caspian and Jill and Eustace (whom she quite failed to
recognise) she had hysterics and went back to the house and began
ringing up the police with stories about a lion escaped from a circus,
and escaped convicts who broke down walls and carried drawn swords.  In
the midst of all this fuss Jill and Eustace slipped quietly indoors and
changed out of their bright clothes into ordinary things, and Caspian
went back into his own world.  And the wall, at Aslan's word, was made
whole again.  When the police arrived and found no lion, no broken
wall, and no convicts, and the Head behaving like a lunatic, there was
an inquiry into the whole thing.  And in the inquiry all sorts of
things about Experiment House came out, and about ten people got
expelled.  After that, the Head's friends saw that the Head was no use
as a Head, so they got her made an Inspector to interfere with other
Heads.  And when they found she wasn't much good even at that, they got
her into Parliament where she lived happily ever after.</p><p>Eustace buried his fine clothes secretly one night in the school
grounds, but Jill smuggled hers home and wore them at a fancy–dress
ball next holidays.  And from that day forth things changed for the
better at Experiment House, and it became quite a good school.  And
Jill and Eustace were always friends.</p><p>But far off in Narnia, King Rilian buried his father, Caspian the
Navigator, Tenth of that name, and mourned for him.  He himself ruled
Narnia well and the land was happy in his days, though Puddleglum
(whose foot was as good as new in three weeks) often pointed out that
bright mornings brought on wet afternoons, and that you couldn't expect
good times to last.  The opening into the hillside was left open, and
often in hot summer days the Narnians go in there with ships and
lanterns and down to the water and sail to and fro, singing, on the
cool, dark underground sea, telling each other stories of the cities
that lie fathoms deep below.  If ever you have the luck to go to Narnia
yourself, do not forget to have a look at those caves.</p></section><footer/></body></html>